February 06, 2019

Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles

To the Council for Economic Education, New York, New York

Thank you, Nan, for that kind introduction, and thank you to President Mester of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland for inviting me to speak this evening. I am honored to be here and to support the mission that you and the Council for Economic Education have worked so hard to advance--that every student in America gets a strong, early start on their financial education.

That mission is critical in its own right, but it also reflects the deeply held value of participation--of giving young people the chance to shape not just their own futures, but also the futures of their communities and their country. Because so much of the language of finance is couched in terms of metrics and rationality, we often forget that finance is something we never do alone. It is, by definition, a collaboration, which helps us work together to achieve common goals.

The Federal Reserve is no exception. Tonight, I want to briefly discuss the role that participation plays in the Federal Reserve's work and outline one effort to solicit broad participation--an upcoming conference on stress tests, intended to make those tests more open, transparent, and effective.

Public institutions exist under a grant of trust from the people they serve, to pursue a specific policy goal. When the public holds an institution accountable for that grant, the institution becomes stronger. The Federal Reserve System we know today emerged through decades of legislation, public consultation, and debate--from the original Federal Reserve Act, which created the Federal Reserve System, to the Banking Act of 1935, 1 which established the modern Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), to the Treasury-Federal Reserve Accord of 1951 (PDF) , which ensured the separation of monetary and fiscal policy. 2 These changes made our economy and our country stronger, because they improved the Federal Reserve's ability to accomplish the mission Congress assigned it.

Throughout this evolution, a key principle has been that accountability allows the Federal Reserve to be independent--that we are subject to challenge, to counterargument, and to the emergence of new evidence and ideas. For our work to remain legitimate, the public must be able to see, understand, and engage with our efforts; to reaffirm their support when we have earned it; and to offer informed guidance on when to change course.

Accountability is only one reason the Federal Reserve relies on public outreach and participation. We also rely on participation for our effectiveness, because the best ideas in finance and economics can, and often do, come from a wide variety of sources. Agencies like the Federal Reserve are a collection of expertise--informed by experience and positioned to turn a broad range of information into policy. But we are not, and cannot be, a monopoly on insight or wisdom.

The Federal Reserve recognizes these limits, and the need to invite new ideas, through a variety of initiatives. We seek out a qualified, diverse workforce, and foster an inclusive workplace. 3 We meet frequently with a range of advisory councils, drawing on expertise in banking, modeling, and consumer and community finance. 4 We have increased transparency around our policy process and issued new reports on financial stability and banking supervision and regulation, with new details about our work. 5 And across the Federal Reserve System, our staff publishes a wide range of economic and policy research and plays an active role in academic discourse.

Monetary policy itself shows the value of participation and transparency. U.S. monetary policy is the sole responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Yet some of the most important innovations in the field have come from outside the Reserve System. Since 1935, we have decided monetary policy by committee, a structure that has served us well because it is designed to capture different views of a wide and varied national economy. And over the past several decades, the FOMC has greatly increased its own transparency--from postmeeting announcements, to announcing an objective for inflation, to a published survey of economic projections, to postmeeting press conferences (which will now take place after every FOMC meeting). 6 As many of you know, over the course of 2019, we will be reviewing our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices, and we will hold a research conference on the subject with outside speakers, as well as "Fed Listens" events at a number of Reserve Banks, to hear from a broad range of constituencies. But these improvements are more than a simple matter of disclosure. They are an invitation to participate, and a way to provide the public with the means and opportunity to inform our work.

This year, we are taking similar steps to improve a cornerstone of our post-crisis rules. Supervisory stress tests offer an independent and valuable lens on the health of the banking system. They offer us a forward-looking measurement of bank capital, a view of common and systemic risks across the banking sector, and a broader understanding of the health of the financial system. The results are valuable for markets, analysts, and ultimately, the participating firms.

Ten years have passed since the Federal Reserve conducted its first supervisory stress tests. That initial experiment helped stabilize financial markets and shore up our banking system at a critical and uncertain time. Our challenge now is to preserve the strength of the test, while improving its efficiency, transparency, and integration into the post-crisis regulatory framework.

To that end, the stress tests have not remained static. Just in the past several days, the Board acted to suspend stress tests this year for lower-risk firms--generally, those with total assets between $100 billion and $250 billion. 7 That move follows the passage of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. 8 The extended cycle provides administrative burden relief for these institutions and recognizes the different risks that they typically pose--especially compared to the largest and most complex firms, whose failure poses the greatest risk to the real economy. Even with this change, the stress tests remain a core part of our supervision of these firms. Our experience with this "interim" year will inform the move to a permanently longer testing cycle--a change that would, of course, be subject to a full notice and comment process. 9

Improvements like these are necessary to ensure our supervisory framework evolves from its post-crisis origins to an effective steady state. The question of how best to consolidate the gains from the first 10 years of stress testing deserves the attention and effort of the country's best minds. We should welcome changes and novel ideas, even when they explore stress testing in a new and unfamiliar light.

In July, as a forum for such ideas, we will host a public conference focused on the transparency and effectiveness of stress testing. Called Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review , the event will convene panel discussions, drawing on a mix of presenters with industry, academic, and regulatory backgrounds. It will involve written papers, which will be compiled and published to spur further research. We expect the insights from the conference to inform the evolution of our stress-testing framework--and we hope to continue the conversation well after the conference ends.

This input is as essential to our work as any public outreach we do. Stress testing provides insight into a dynamic financial system, and our stress-testing process must be dynamic as well. More broadly, the core of the Federal Reserve's independence is a broad consensus around the value and public worth of our mission. The Federal Reserve is the steward and trustee of that mission, but the public is its owner. To serve the public, we must not just allow input, but welcome it; not just permit debate, but foster it; not just allow participation, but treat it as essential to our work.

Thank you.
February 06, 2019

Chairman Jerome H. Powell

At Conversation with the Chairman: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting, Washington, D.C.

Thank you to all the educators who are here with us in Washington or are joining us online. I look forward to responding to your questions. But first, I have a few thoughts about the vital work you do as economics educators and its connection to what the Federal Reserve is trying to accomplish. I promise to be brief, because it is a school night.

I am here today, and the Fed has organized this event, because of the importance of economics education. Some of your students may go on to become professional economists, but all of them, I hope, will apply the valuable lessons and the skills they have gained from economics in other careers and in others aspects of their lives.

Studying economics can benefit students in multiple ways. The lessons of economics are valuable in a wide variety of vocations. Moreover, the knowledge gained will empower students as consumers, managers of their own finances, and as informed citizens. Economics has been consistently useful to me over my career in law, finance, and government service. It is, of course, central to my current role as a monetary policymaker and financial regulator.

In government, economic analysis is one of the principal tools we use in making policy decisions. Among other things, economics is an essential facet of the science of public policy. What policies actually work? Which ones sound good but don't work, or are actually counter-productive? Economics gives us the tools to answer those questions and help us make the best the decisions on behalf of the public.

Of course, economics is not only the basis for judgments and decisions made by the Fed and other government agencies. It also underpins the countless decisions by consumers, businesses, and investors that drive economic activity. The concepts you teach and apply in the classroom guide those decisions and even help explain human behavior outside of the workings of the economy. For example, to continue to grow and succeed, any business owner should understand the differences between fixed cost, variable cost, average cost, and marginal cost. Businesses and investors need to understand present or discounted value, but so should any parent or grandparent starting a college fund. Economics teaches us about the power of incentives, which are central to thinking about and understanding regulatory and tax policy. But incentives also help motivate people in a variety of other settings, such as encouraging students to do their best in school, helping reduce traffic jams, or even nudging someone to save more or to exercise regularly. Economics is a practical and powerful tool for understanding how we relate to each other.

And that's why what you do for your students is so important. Like all teachers, you are helping prepare them for success in life. The knowledge you impart and the intellect and talents you help develop are tools that your students can use to achieve that success. Economics teaches analytical and critical thinking skills useful to anyone. Part of your students' success is their economic success as capable, creative, and productive members of the workforce and as consumers adept at managing their finances. Your students benefit from this education, but so does everyone else in society. We all benefit when better-educated citizens support economic policies that help our nation prosper. We all benefit from the capability, creativity, and productivity of our workforce, because nothing is more important to a healthy and growing economy. Responsible consumers skilled in managing their finances are better prepared to weather bad times, and stronger household finances overall can help sustain economic growth and mitigate a downturn.

Stabilizing growth and mitigating a downturn, of course, are aspects of the Federal Reserve's mission. Monetary policy can be a powerful tool to achieve these ends, but, in truth, its powers are dwarfed by larger forces, such as the productivity of the American people and the strength of their finances. By educating students and supporting their future contributions to the economy as workers and consumers, all teachers, especially economics teachers, are furthering our goals at the Fed, so let me offer my further thanks for making our job easier.

To help support your work as teachers, the Federal Reserve Board and the 12 Reserve Banks conduct programs, organize events, and publish books to spread knowledge of economics, financial literacy, and the role of the Fed in promoting a healthy economy and financial system. You can find some of those resources at our websites: FederalReserve.gov and FederalReserveEducation.org.

Each of the Reserve Banks has community outreach and educational initiatives, and the outreach to economics teachers is coordinated by the System Economic Education Group, which has been chaired by Princeton Williams.

At the Board of Governors, for some years we have operated a program called FedEd, which sends Board employees into high schools throughout the Washington, D.C., area. This outreach depends on several dozen volunteers from our staff--typically, recent college graduates--who help teach about the Fed, economics and finance, and answer questions about work opportunities at the Board. The Federal Reserve is dedicated to promoting diversity in our ranks and in the economics profession, and FedEd and other programs across the Federal Reserve System have helped advance this goal by reaching many schools with significant numbers of minority students.

Let me leave it there, and again thank you for participating in this town hall, and thank you for the valuable work you do every school day.

Conversation with the Chairman: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting
