April 02, 2019

Governor Michelle W. Bowman

At the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Washington, D.C.

Thank you to the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) for this opportunity to share my perspective and some of my goals as a Federal Reserve Board governor on issues of interest to you and many in your states. 1

I emphasize that word "perspective" because the view from Washington can be very different from how things look in your states and communities. No one knows that better than I do, of course, because not so long ago, I was sitting where you are, enjoying the dinner provided by CSBS and hearing the perspective from Washington. I'm still enjoying the dinner tonight, but find I am now, so to speak, also on the menu. And in this position, as part of the Federal Reserve but also still deeply rooted in my experience as a community banker and state regulator, I'll offer my thoughts on forging a closer relationship and strengthening communication between the Board of Governors and state banking commissioners.

First, to establish some context, let me say a few words about the Fed's role and perspective on supervising community banks. The lion's share of community banks are those with total assets of $500 million or less, with the Fed defining the sector as those with up to $10 billion in assets. The Federal Reserve directly supervises 731 state-chartered community banks, which is only a small share of the number of state-chartered banks overseen by CSBS members. The fact that this is only a small share of the total might sound to some people like the Federal Reserve has only a small role in community banking. But it's important to remember that the Fed is the primary federal supervisor responsible for all bank and thrift holding companies, a total of 3,912. This includes the vast majority of all community banking organizations. The Fed also influences the supervision of all community and regional banks by developing both safety and soundness and consumer rules to implement laws passed by Congress, applicable to insured depositories and their holding companies. Typically this is done in collaboration with other federal agencies and after seeking the public's input. I mention Congress and these other agencies to emphasize that the Fed shares responsibility for writing and implementing federal regulations for community banks.

Now, let me describe my role. In addition to my broader responsibilities in supervision and regulation, I am Chair of the Board's Smaller Regional and Community Banking subcommittee, which oversees our work in this area. I am also the Chair of the Board's committee tasked with oversight of our rulemaking and supervision on consumer issues.

I also participate in carrying out the Federal Reserve's other responsibilities, such as conducting monetary policy and overseeing the payment system. But it's fair to say that my background in community banking was an important reason I was chosen and confirmed by Congress as the first person to fulfill a new requirement that at least one governor have primary experience working in or supervising community banks. My background and commitment to community banking is also some important context for what I have to say about the Fed's interests in improving communication with the members of CSBS.

I mentioned a moment ago that the perspective in Washington, and from the Board, can be different from the view from your position as banking commissioners, and that is certainly true. But one thing I have learned, since joining the Board in November, is that my fellow governors, along with the staff at the Board, share your view, as I do, about the vital importance of community banking and the essential role community banks play in our financial system.

Community banks are frequently the economic engines supporting and driving the economies of many communities, especially in rural areas. In these communities, they are the primary providers of financial services for individuals and small businesses, and a source of financial advice and civic leadership. They play an indispensable role in areas not served by larger institutions and in other communities of all different sizes, from urban to rural, serving a range of customers, including some that are sometimes not as high a priority for larger banks.

I think it is important to note, and too often overlooked, that the vast majority of community banks managed their risks well in the years leading up to and during the financial crisis and were not the source of the excessive risk taking that caused the crisis. For this reason among others, the Federal Reserve has been engaged in an active effort to tailor regulations, including those issued in the wake of the financial crisis, to appropriately reflect the potential risk that an institution might pose to financial stability.

I am pleased to see some evidence we are making progress. Last year's CSBS survey found that community banks reported a decrease in regulatory costs in 2017. 2 This was the first reduction in burden reported since the survey began in 2014. The decline was attributed to the implementation of changes stemming from the recent review by the banking agencies under the EGRPRA, the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996. There has been progress in tailoring regulations that affect community banks, and I believe more progress lies ahead as we implement the changes that Congress included in S. 2155 and explore additional opportunities to reduce burden while maintaining the resiliency and strength of smaller banks. 3

Before I go further, let me give a brief assessment of how community banks are faring. This might seem like an issue that is primarily of interest to community bankers and regulators, but I don't look at it that way at all. One of my most important responsibilities now is voting on the monetary policy decisions of the Federal Open Market Committee, and that requires me to closely and constantly monitor the health of the U.S. economy. And when community banks are the source for more than half of all lending to small businesses, which together account for two-thirds of private sector job creation, then the health of community banking has a big influence on the health of the U.S. economy. 4

Since the financial crisis, the health of the community-banking sector has improved significantly. Over those years and today, the large majority of community banks have maintained sound levels of capital. Although the number of community banks in the United States continues to fall due to consolidation, overall the sector continues to post strong earnings, which, in turn, contribute to maintaining healthy capital positions. One measure of this strong financial position is that no community banks failed in 2018. The shared responsibility we have as financial supervisors to ensure the ongoing viability of community banks requires cooperation and coordination. We must continue to ensure that the institutions we supervise are proactively managing their risks to remain strong. It's our job to identify emerging risks to community banks and to ensure bankers are identifying and managing their risks appropriately. We want to ensure that loans are underwritten prudently and that bankers are actively managing the concentrations of credit risk in their portfolios.

We welcome the strong lending growth that many community banks are experiencing, which is fueling job creation and sustaining our economic expansion, which in July will become the longest in U.S. history. But strong lending growth must be supported by prudent, well-managed funding plans in order to manage the risk that strains on liquidity may arise more quickly than is sometimes anticipated.

Now, let me turn back to my main theme today, which is fostering better communication between CSBS and state banking commissioners and the Board of Governors. Improved communication is a top priority for me for several reasons.

First, it is very much my approach to government service, and leadership in particular, to do a lot of listening. A wise person once said that the most effective leaders do more listening than talking. When I became Kansas' State Bank Commissioner, I started a twice-yearly series of roundtables with the chief executives of banks across the state. It was an excellent way for me to better understand the issues that were impacting bankers in a way that was less formal than when banks comment on rules and less fraught than the supervisory process. Sure, it took time away from the office, from consultation with the legislature, and the deadlines all of us have faced. In my case, considering the size of Kansas, it was also time away from home and family. However, I don't have to tell those of you who have also found a lot of merit in such tours that it is an enormous advantage to find out what is on the minds of those in the field.

The second, very straightforward reason to foster better communication with all of you is that the nature of financial regulation and supervision in the United States argues strongly for better coordination. To a much greater extent than in other nations, in the United States financial oversight is divided between the federal government and subnational authorities--the states. At the federal level, responsibility is further divided between different agencies, such as the Fed, the FDIC, the Office of Comptroller of the Currency, and the National Credit Union Administration. This system evolved over time, and as things stand, there are some advantages to this specialization. But this division of labor may, at times, inhibit information sharing, and as a general principle, better communication can help overcome this challenge.

More specifically, better communication and information sharing between state banking commissioners and the Federal Reserve can further improve the early identification and resolution of emerging issues at community banks. Harnessing and sharing these sometimes divergent views can serve to strengthen a financial regulatory system that shares responsibility among many state and federal agencies. Better communication and information sharing will benefit both you and the Federal Reserve, but my motivation is that the Fed has much to gain here. Because states are responsible for chartering and co-supervising the large majority of community banks, they can provide a broader perspective into local community banking issues and trends.

Let me pause here for a moment and say that improving communication doesn't necessarily mean that the Federal Reserve and the CSBS members will always agree. We won't, and perhaps we shouldn't. A diversity of views can be a strength. A robust discussion requires a thorough analysis of differing views, which leads to a more informed understanding of issues. This healthy give and take is the fourth reason for better communication: It leads to better outcomes.

I will cite one example that I know is on the minds of many of you--the rulemaking process the agencies are currently engaged in on the community bank leverage ratio (CBLR). Here is an excellent example of where it makes good sense to consult closely. I know you have a lot of knowledge and expertise to bring to bear on this issue, which helps explain why Congress has required the agencies to consult with the states. As you know, the Fed and the other agencies are now gathering and evaluating comments on the CBLR and getting feedback on this interagency proposal. So, now is a good time to re-engage. I am committed to re-engaging with you on the interagency proposal and ways we might be able to improve it. I am eager to hear your thoughts.

I have one more reason for better communication, but first I will give you an idea of what I have in mind for that consultation. The formal means by which CSBS and others comment on a rulemaking is important, but I think we would also all benefit from more informal, and more frequent contact. If you have an issue, if you have something to say, just pick up the phone. It is also my intention to be on the road a lot, visiting Federal Reserve Districts and talking to bankers, consumers, and community groups. When I come to your state, I hope to see you, and I promise to make time to talk.

My final reason for better communication brings me back to a point I made at the outset: the United States needs a strong community-banking sector. We need strong community banks because they help support strong communities. Strong communities are the building blocks of a strong nation. They provide safety, education and economic opportunities, and help define the values we hold dear. Community banks are vital to the success of communities. They help us save and plan for a better future. The credit they extend helps preserve farming as a way of life for American families, and provides the means for small businesses to start and to thrive, which is so important to the health of communities.

This is not an abstract notion for me. As a community banker, I have seen how access to credit and support from a financial institution with deep roots in a community can make a direct and immediate difference in people's lives. I continued to feel that way when I did the job you do, as a state banking commissioner, helping ensure that families and communities have access to financial services that are so important to their success. I enjoyed being a community banker, and I hope you know I've enjoyed working closely with all of you as a banking commissioner, and I now look forward to building a stronger partnership between all of you and the Federal Reserve Board.

Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. I hope to see you soon in your states, and I wish you a productive and enjoyable visit to Washington.
April 02, 2019

Vice Chair for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K. Quarles

At the 2019 European Bank Executive Committee Forum "The Future of Banking: The Human Factor," Brussels, Belgium

Thank you for the opportunity to join you. I am grateful for the chance to speak with such a diverse and distinguished group of academics, industry leaders, and colleagues in regulation and central banking. Conversations like these always remind me that, while we all approach our roles in the financial sector differently, we share a deeper commitment to a common goal: a safe, stable, and resilient financial system, capable of supporting strong and sustainable economic growth.

A decade ago, that common goal became an imperative. The financial regulatory community worked frantically to repair the vulnerabilities that the global financial crisis exposed and to address a set of financial risks that failed to respect national borders. The financial system we have today bears the imprint of our response a decade ago. Basel III is now final. Derivatives markets are now safer and better regulated. Levels of capital and liquidity at the largest banks are now higher, and with reforms to recovery and resolution, the risks and potential costs of a catastrophic failure of a major institution are lower. These are profound accomplishments of international cooperation, which returned the global financial system from the brink of collapse to stability and health. But health does not make cooperation or vigilance any less necessary. On the contrary, as the G20 leaders said in creating the Financial Stability Board (FSB), "a sense of normalcy should not lead to complacency." 1

The FSB exists to help sustain the common efforts made in the throes of the crisis--to identify and address systemic vulnerabilities, to develop stronger regulatory and supervisory policies, and to create a more resilient global financial system. It is a platform, and a place for its 24 members and 73 representatives to coordinate their work; to identify and address issues that span financial products, intermediaries, and markets; and to avoid the pre-crisis regulatory fragmentation that left financial stability risks unaddressed. The relevance of this platform, to its members and to a changing financial system, is critical to preserving our last 10 years of hard-earned gains.

Today, I want to briefly outline three tenets that I believe are essential to preserving the relevance and vitality of the FSB: engagement, vigilance, and analysis. These principles, which I discussed more fully in remarks last week, underlie the most successful elements of the post-crisis reforms. 2 They should remain the foundation of the FSB's work, as we turn from drafting new standards to implementing them and devote more time and attention to the emerging vulnerabilities.

Engagement Regulatory cooperation has long been essential to financial stability--not only because it fosters consistency in global rules, but also because it fosters trust. When authorities develop new policy together, when they identify common standards and implement them in their home countries, and when they plan and debate the nature of emerging risks, they also develop a common understanding of each other's work and a common approach to addressing new problems.

However, trust among regulators means little on its own. It must come with the trust of the constituencies regulators serve, and the trust of those whom our decisions affect. The FSB is a conduit for this trust, as it is accountable to the G20 and to the nations and people the G20 leaders represent. We have an obligation to make the most of that conduit, by engaging in genuine, substantive dialogue with a wide range of stakeholders, to a greater and more effective degree than in the past. We should invite reflection on the design and impact of our efforts, solicit input on risks to financial stability, and better communicate our mission and activities to the public, without the veneer of technical jargon.

The FSB can begin this work at home, by strengthening the role of the regional groups that are already part of the organization. In 2011, the FSB established six consultative groups representing large regions of the globe. The intent was to expand our outreach beyond the membership of the G20 and to better reflect the FSB's global mission and impact. Today, the groups meet once or twice a year and help the FSB obtain broader input into its policy development agenda. They can, and should, have the opportunity to do more--not only to promote implementation of international policy initiatives but also to give a clear view of financial stability developments in their respective regions. A study of the groups' operations is now underway, which will shed light on how to upgrade their effectiveness as an outreach and feedback mechanism.

We can also engage more effectively outside the FSB--with businesses, public institutions, market participants, and scholars--and give the public the means and the opportunity to provide meaningful feedback on our work. Some steps are already underway. We established a new expectation that all FSB policy recommendations will be open for at least 60 days of public comment, instead of the shorter periods used in the past. We began a recent effort around the differences in regulatory environments and market conditions across jurisdictions--known as "market fragmentation"--by convening key stakeholders and academics for a full-day workshop, which I hope will be the rule for future projects, not the exception. Earlier this year, we released publicly the FSB work program for the first time. 3

This broad engagement is essential to understanding new developments that are relevant to financial stability. Take, for example, the "fintech" trends I discussed in remarks last week, to which the FSB is dedicating significant attention. Claims about fintech run the gamut from the utopian to the apocalyptic--yet the mantle of fintech covers a wide range of new business models, products, and trends. Their contours and their impact also vary across national boundaries, from mobile wallets in Kenya, to online mortgages in the United States, to money market funds founded by technology companies in China. Understanding one of these new uses of technology is not the same as understanding all of them. Identifying the risks and opportunities they pose requires context, information, and insight that can only come from a variety of stakeholders with experience developing, using, and monitoring them.

I will continue to seek ways to invite and encourage engagement during my chairmanship, and to give the public a clearer and fuller view of FSB's decisionmaking process. Few efforts are closer to the heart of our collective work or to the accountability and trust that the FSB helps foster.

Vigilance Trust and accountability are also prerequisites for the FSB to pursue its mission. The first prong of our mandate, now a decade old, is to "assess vulnerabilities affecting the global financial system, and identify and review . . . the regulatory, supervisory, and related actions needed to address them . . . ." 4 The FSB's primary role, and its principal contribution to international financial regulation, is to look forward--to see past the issues and practices of the day, and identify new vulnerabilities, long before they lead to widespread economic distress.

The FSB's Standing Committee on Assessment of Vulnerabilities (under the leadership of FSB Vice Chair Klaas Knot of De Nederlandsche Bank, here today) is an important forum and catalyst for this work. In the months ahead, the committee will develop a new framework for the identification and assessment of financial vulnerabilities. Their efforts will rely on transparent engagement with a wide range of stakeholders--including banks and nonbank financial institutions, the academic community, financial regulators, national authorities, and standard-setting bodies. This kind of broad outreach is essential. The causes of financial crises rarely announce themselves ahead of time, and only a wide range of views can give us the perspective and understanding to address them in advance. The right model for this work is not a small team of detectives--it is a search party.

The FSB's efforts on nonbank financial intermediation, which I discussed last week, reflect a similar approach. Nonbank financing has grown since the financial crisis, and it has been a source of systemic risk, often involving high leverage, maturity and liquidity mismatches, opaque structures, and concentrated holdings of risky assets. Nonbank financing can also lead to lower lending standards, bidding up the price of risky assets and sending an encouraging signal to credit underwriters. These channels played a role in the recent global financial crisis, and more recently, new forms of interconnectedness between nonbank financial firms and the banking system have emerged. In some scenarios, both domestically and internationally, such ties could amplify risks.

These developments raise important issues. Is the growth of nonbank financing altering existing market structures? Are there new vulnerabilities in the financial system? How will nonbank financing develop, and how should it do so? The FSB is taking a variety of complementary approaches to answering these questions.

First, we produce an annual report that outlines the developments in nonbank financing, detailing global trends and potential risks and providing reliable information to foster public discussion. Second, the FSB develops policies to promote the resilience of these firms (without impeding the growth of sustainable nonbank financing models), and we work closely with other multinational organizations to monitor implementation. Finally, and going forward, we must begin analyzing the effectiveness of the policies on nonbank financing that have been implemented.

Analysis The same spirit of self-reflection should guide the FSB's efforts in other policy areas. Stakeholders trust the FSB to undertake thoughtful, detailed work on emerging risks to financial stability. Yet identifying those risks before a crisis means dealing in uncertainty, and making policy on evolving issues, where no one can claim complete expertise. To maintain that trust, we must be willing to make improvements when the evidence justifies it--to undertake rigorous analysis, before and after issuing new standards, and to follow that analysis where it leads.

Many post-crisis policies, including those aimed at the implicit subsidy for "too-big-to-fail" institutions, have been in place long enough to allow for evaluation. We can now begin to ask fundamental, critical questions: What have the effects of these reforms been, whether intended or unintended, salutary or adverse? Have we successfully reduced or eliminated the problem? Has there been a tradeoff, in the form of new, unintended risks or costs?

As I have described elsewhere, the FSB is launching a global study with multinational policymakers to start answering these important questions as part of its broader effort to evaluate the effects of post-crisis reforms. We intend to bring analytical rigor to these questions, and we recognize that the academic community has undertaken much work in this area. As a result, we will draw extensively on academic advisors during all phases of the work we are undertaking. I also encourage other experts in this field to look closely to the consultative document that will be coming from the study next year. We welcome the input as we undertake the study of this signature issue from the crisis.

The task of this project, like the task of the FSB itself, is to foster insight on the road ahead. The work of the FSB reflects the fact that, in a global financial system, we cannot see and address emerging problems alone. Working as allies and colleagues, we have bound up most of the wounds from the last financial crisis. To avoid reopening them--and returning to a fragmented international regime--we will have to recommit to collaboration, embrace insight where it emerges, and follow evidence where it leads. With broad engagement, rigorous vigilance, and committed analysis, the risks ahead of us can be less dangerous than the ones we left behind.
