March 01, 2024

Governor Adriana D. Kugler

At the 2024 Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Economic Summit, Stanford University, Stanford, California

Thank you, Mark, and thank you for the opportunity to be part of the discussions today. 1 For more than 40 years, the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research has assisted economic policymakers by producing sharp analysis and fostering the kind of constructive dialogue reflected in today's agenda.

My topic today is the Federal Reserve's dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices—and, specifically, the tradeoffs that sometimes arise when pursuing these two objectives. I say "sometimes" because there have been times and certain economic conditions in which such tradeoffs did not arise—or at least were not apparent. This distinction is an important one, especially when considering the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)'s recent progress in reducing high inflation while the labor market has remained strong. Better understanding the tradeoffs, or lack thereof, in pursuing the dual mandate will help researchers and policymakers draw lessons from these welcome recent developments.

History of the Inflation–Unemployment Tradeoff In 1977, Congress legislated the Federal Reserve's "dual mandate," under which the FOMC is required to pursue both maximum employment and stable prices, with both objectives on an equal footing. 2 At the outset, it is worth stressing that these goals are generally complementary, and I will return to this point shortly. But when they are not complementary, one way to think of the policy problem is in terms of tradeoffs: Maximum employment is the highest level of employment that will not cause inflation to escalate significantly above levels consistent with price stability.

Before going into those tradeoffs, I want to emphasize that achieving the Committee's employment goal on an ongoing basis rests on achieving price stability. Price stability enables long-lasting economic expansions, which strengthen the labor market and expand employment opportunities. This process particularly benefits families and communities that all too often have been left behind. 3

But it is appropriate to recognize also that tradeoffs between the goals of maximum employment and price stability can occur in the short term. Indeed, the potential shorter-term tradeoff between unemployment and inflation has long featured prominently among the economic considerations of policymakers. Government action to boost employment through fiscal or monetary stimulus has historically tended to increase aggregate spending and inflation, too. On the contrary, actions to reduce inflation by shifting to contractionary fiscal or monetary policy have tended to slow economic activity and raise unemployment, or at least slow the pace of job creation.

The idea of a short-run tradeoff is reflected in the original specification of the "Phillips curve," named after New Zealand economist A.W. Phillips, who plotted historical values of the United Kingdom's unemployment rate and growth in nominal wages between 1861 and 1957, showing an often inverse relationship between the two. Although the Phillips curve was initially specified in terms of wages, later versions have more typically compared unemployment with price inflation.

Taken at face value, a tradeoff between keeping employment high and reducing inflation would seem to present policymakers with a dilemma. It suggests that when inflation is well above levels associated with price stability, policymakers must engineer a significant increase in unemployment to bring inflation down. Disinflation can be especially challenging when expectations of future inflation are high. 4 We saw this in the 1970s and 1980s. Convincing households and businesses that the FOMC was committed to reducing inflation required accepting a protracted, though ultimately temporary, period of high unemployment, as then Fed Chair Paul Volcker came to believe. Volcker is widely credited with ending the "Great Inflation" experienced at the time through his willingness to induce a punishing recession. He lowered inflation and kept it down, in substantial part by convincing the public that the Fed would keep inflation in check whatever the cost, thereby lowering expectations of future inflation. 5

While long experience shows that there can be a tradeoff between policy actions to pursue maximum employment and stable prices, there are times and conditions when this is not the case, or at least when there is little evidence of a tradeoff. For example, for most of the decade after the Great Recession, FOMC policy was, by some measures at least, highly accommodative, yet inflation ran consistently below the Committee's 2 percent target. So when inflation is below target and employment is below maximum sustainable levels, accommodative policy can be used to pursue both sides of the mandate.

Academic economists have debated for decades about the circumstances in which the tradeoff applies. One strand of the research literature proposes that a central bank can indeed achieve good economic outcomes by focusing on a single mandate, an inflation target, and that policies to promote stable prices can also secure low unemployment. In this view, stabilization of inflation ensures that the economy performs at its optimal level, with firms producing just the right amount such that no resources, including workers, are left on the sidelines. This theory fits in a world in which the economy is driven by demand—in such a case, shocks coming from the demand side of the economy can be offset by monetary policy, which works via aggregate demand. 6

But in the real world—which is not so simple—demand shocks are not the only forces that can drive economic fluctuations. Supply shocks not only exist, but they can also be large and persistent, as we have learned over the past several years. Adverse supply shocks, just like higher inflation expectations, make managing the tradeoff between inflation and unemployment more difficult and costly. While a sharp reduction in demand reduces both economic activity and inflation, a sharp reduction in supply, such as a sudden loss of global oil supply, increases inflation and reduces economic activity. Trying to combat inflation by raising interest rates would further reduce economic activity and employment, while reducing interest rates to boost economic activity and employment raises inflation even higher. Therefore, counteracting a persistent supply shock with monetary policy tools may help with one side of the mandate but create even larger deviations from the other side of the mandate.

Inflation and Unemployment in the Pandemic and Its Aftermath Let me now turn to the pandemic experience. Inflation picked up in 2021, and by mid-2022, 12-month inflation, based on personal consumption expenditures (PCE), hit 7 percent, well above the FOMC's 2 percent target. It was the most significant surge in inflation since the 1970s, prompting fears that it could raise expectations of future inflation and make getting inflation down again require a steep tradeoff—that is, much higher unemployment.

One more specific concern was that a so-called wage–price spiral would emerge, as may have been the case for a time in the 1970s. In a tight labor market, expectations of continued high inflation can lead workers trying to maintain their living standards to demand higher raises. In a context of strong aggregate demand, firms will likely grant the wage increases to retain their workers—then pass through the resulting cost increase as higher prices. To avoid a continuing spiral, demand and supply in labor and product markets must be rebalanced—through lower aggregate demand, greater aggregate supply, or both. 7 If achieving this balance requires a drastic reduction in aggregate demand, then sustainably taming inflation could require a high cost in terms of the employment mandate. Fortunately, we appear to have avoided a wage–price spiral this time, as I will discuss later.

As inflation rose and began to appear persistent, the FOMC rightly focused on restoring price stability, knowing that without price stability, the economy would not work for anyone and that high inflation would ultimately undermine the strength of the labor market. While interest rates rose rapidly, some feared that the cost of disinflation would be persistently elevated unemployment. But over the past year or so, that tradeoff has been much less evident than many feared. We have seen inflation cool significantly, falling more rapidly than at any time since the 1980s. Yet unemployment remains near the lowest levels seen only a few times since the 1960s.

How have we managed to avoid the familiar tradeoff during this period and see such welcome outcomes on both the inflation and employment fronts? I would propose a few possible reasons. These center on the fact that the pandemic inflation featured both supply and demand shocks. In the limited time that I have today, I don't propose to get into the debate about exactly how much of the recent inflation can be explained by supply as opposed to demand. But I will discuss how both demand and supply forces have been important in the rise and fall in the inflation rate. 8

The pandemic caused a significant reduction in supply in some areas of the economy. Limits on the supply of goods resulted from restricted output in many industries. Consider a key U.S. manufacturing industry, auto production. In 2019, the U.S. manufactured 10-1/2 million light vehicles. In 2020, production plunged to 8-1/2 million, with pandemic-related plant shutdowns followed by worldwide shortages of computer chips and other parts. 9 It has taken the industry a long time to recover—auto production was less than 9 million in 2021 and a bit under 10 million in 2022. Constrained vehicle supply played a big role in boosting auto prices. And it wasn't just motor vehicles; for example, you might recall reports of food processing plant shutdowns, and many other goods-producing industries also suffered from "lost output." U.S. industrial production dropped at the onset of the pandemic and then remained below its pre-pandemic level until early 2022 despite strong demand for physical goods; indeed, evidence shows that output was held down by insufficient supply of materials. 10

But supply problems were not limited to goods; indeed, insufficient supply of labor has also been widely cited by businesses as having held down output. Labor supply was suddenly and severely limited early in the pandemic as workers voluntarily and, in some cases, involuntarily stayed out of the workplace. The labor force did not recover to pre-pandemic levels until mid-2022. Older workers, in particular, left the labor market in large numbers. But even many prime-age workers—those between the ages of 25 and 54—withdrew because of school disruptions and health concerns, and prime-age labor force participation remained below its pre-pandemic level until early 2023. A slowdown in immigration, likewise, deprived the economy of a customary source of labor supply growth, as did elevated mortality due to COVID-19. 11

Fortunately, these supply shortages for both goods and labor have mostly dissipated. For example, auto production in 2023 nearly regained its 2019 level, and industrial production as well as various goods supply indicators have returned closer to their pre-pandemic levels. Congestion in logistics and transportation networks eased, and firms sometimes found alternative supply chain networks.

In the labor market, shortages directly related to the pandemic have eased, helping restore labor force participation, likely in part because of the reopening of schools, progress with the health situation, and help from childcare subsidies and other policies. Increased capabilities for remote work, allowing for a decoupling between firm and worker location, expanded the pool of available workers and jobs. More broadly, strong labor demand has enticed more workers into the labor market to the point that labor force participation among prime-age workers is now above pre-pandemic levels. And immigration has rebounded as well.

Another, more subtle source of labor market supply recovery has been improvements in the quality of matches between firms and workers. At any time, a crucial factor that affects labor supply is how well the skills of available workers fulfill the needs of employers. With labor in many sectors in short supply and very high numbers of job openings, many workers quit their jobs to move to new ones. Economists generally believe that increased labor turnover improves worker–firm matches—workers find jobs that make better use of their skills, typically with higher pay, and firms find workers that are better suited for their businesses and are more productive at their jobs. Economic expansions, such as the one that has continued since April 2020, present more opportunities for workers to find a good match. 12 And it appears that workers and firms were pretty efficient at finding each other over the past couple of years, likely upgrading the average quality of a job match in the process. 13 Higher-quality job–worker matches improve the productivity of workers, serving like a boost to labor supply.

If reductions in supply contributed to inflation, then recovery of that supply would help lower inflation, too. Supply improvements in the goods sector have helped ease inflation starting in early 2022; for example, in January, the 12-month growth of new motor vehicle prices was less than 1 percent, far slower than its peak pace above 13 percent in the spring of 2022. More broadly, the overall price level for core PCE goods, which excludes food and energy, was fairly flat last year and has actually declined in recent months.

On the labor side, supply recovery has likely contributed to disinflation by helping to ease the pace of wage growth—especially in the labor-intensive services industries. 14 For private services as a whole, 12-month nominal wage growth, as measured by average hourly earnings, was 4.5 percent in January, down from its peak of 5.9 percent in early 2022. And, sure enough, price inflation in services has also slowed: In core PCE services—which accounts for roughly three-fourths of core PCE—12-month inflation was 4.1 percent in January, down from its peak of 5.8 percent early last year. 15

But supply is not the only factor behind the slowing of inflation. Policies affecting aggregate demand have played a role as well. On the fiscal side, measures of the impact of government spending on economic growth turned negative in 2021 after being strongly supportive in 2020. 16 And in terms of monetary policy, the FOMC's actions in late 2021 indicated a sooner-than-previously-anticipated start to policy rate increases, with the FOMC beginning to raise the target range for the federal funds rate in March 2022. After that, the Committee tightened its stance of policy expeditiously. The result can be seen especially in areas of the economy that are sensitive to financial conditions. The housing sector saw a significant slowdown, with residential investment declining more than 15 percent in 2022 and remaining flat in 2023. Growth of investment in equipment was tepid last year, likely due in part to restrictive financial conditions, even as we have seen growth in manufacturing construction for semiconductors and electric vehicle batteries that will help address remaining supply-side bottlenecks.

Aside from these examples of subdued spending in policy-sensitive sectors, we can also see the imprint of monetary policy in the anchoring of inflation expectations. Even amid high inflation, households, businesses, and financial markets believed that inflation would eventually return to its target pace. These beliefs were guided by the FOMC's actions: By raising policy rates expeditiously and communicating clearly, the Committee demonstrated its resolve to lower inflation to 2 percent and its commitment to the price-stability mandate. Anchored inflation expectations are apparent, for example, in the popular University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers. Expectations of inflation for the period covering the next 5 to 10 years have remained relatively stable over the pandemic and close to levels seen before the pandemic. And shorter-term expectations rose in 2021 but have come back down recently. 17 Anchored inflation expectations likely matter for actual price setting. That is what modern theories of the Phillips curve suggest. And the relevance of that theoretical expectation has been suggested by surveys reported by Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond staff: The data show a close relationship between firms' expectations for overall inflation and those firms' own price-setting plans. 18 Crucially, by keeping inflation expectations anchored, the FOMC has likely forestalled the development of wage–price spiral dynamics of the kind I mentioned earlier, while also creating conditions in which inflation has been able to peak at a lower rate than would have been the case if the FOMC had not acted with credibility and clear communication. Real wage growth—that is, growth of wages after accounting for inflation—has turned positive, which means workers' income is rising faster than the cost of living.

A Couple of Final Observations about the Pandemic and Its Aftermath These developments help bring us back to the inflation–unemployment tradeoff that started my discussion. The pandemic experience has shown that the nature of that tradeoff changes with economic conditions, as does the steepness of the Phillips curve. I will close by making two more general observations about the changes that we have seen during the pandemic and its aftermath, with suggestions about open questions for researchers moving forward.

First, supply curves are, as economists say, "convex": Their slope increases sharply after quantity supplied reaches a certain point, such that prices rise quickly. The steep part of the supply curve can come into play when demand nears the limits of an industry's capacity. That could happen either because of an unusually large increase in demand or because of a temporary reduction in industry capacity—or both. Research has shown this is the case for individual industries, even in the pre-pandemic period. 19 During the pandemic, many industries experienced large demand shocks or supply curtailment that contributed to inflation, as I have already discussed, and those same shocks also may have exacerbated the inflationary effects by pushing many industries up the steep part of their supply curves. 20

Early in the pandemic, the convexity or steepness of industry supply curves was quite costly in terms of our inflation mandate. But it has likely helped us more recently as we have apparently moved back down the steep part of the supply curve in many industries, which has allowed for rapid disinflation. 21 An open question in the longer term is whether this process has helped firms learn more about supply chains and inventory management such that we might even be less likely to encounter the steep part of supply curves in the future.

Second, with regard to the Phillips curve specifically, I note that in a large class of economic models, the steepness of the Phillips curve is partly a function of how frequently firms adjust their prices, and that seems to be borne out by recent experience. 22 Before the pandemic, the typical price tag lasted more than 10 months, and this figure was reasonably stable for many years. But the pandemic seems to have moved firms into a regime of more frequent price adjustment—that is, shorter price duration. By early 2022, the typical price was lasting less than five months. Price adjustment frequency has since slowed back down, with the latest data from the third quarter of last year suggesting prices were lasting nearly seven months. 23 Continued slowing of price adjustment frequency is an indicator that firms' costs are rising less quickly and the economy is moving back down the Phillips curve. 24 Interestingly, though, in the workhorse academic models used for studying the effects of monetary policy on the economy, the frequency of price adjustment is often assumed to be constant. Of course, economists have thought about this in the past; but a greater understanding of the relationship between the price adjustment decisions of individual firms and overall inflation is an important area for further academic research. 25

For the reasons I have been discussing, I am cautiously optimistic that we will see continued progress on disinflation without significant deterioration of the labor market. With respect to the inflation and unemployment tradeoff, we have certainly learned a lot during the pandemic—but there is still much more to learn. In particular, I look forward to further research that can enrich the economics profession's understanding of the inflation–unemployment tradeoff and the Phillips curve and continue informing policymakers as well.
March 01, 2024

Governor Christopher J. Waller

At the 2024 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York

Thank you, it is great to be here. I'm pleased to participate in this panel to discuss a policy action now being implemented by central banks around the globe: quantitative tightening (QT). 1 I want to thank Kristin, Matt, and Wenxin for putting together a great paper that provides an overview of the effects of QT across seven central banks.

Often called "large-scale asset purchases" (LSAPs) by central bankers, the view of quantitative easing, or QE, as a tool to add monetary policy accommodation and QT to tighten policy has changed over time. When it was used during and after the Global Financial Crisis, QE was deemed an "unconventional" tool in central banks' arsenals. But QE has now been used numerous times in the past two decades for extended periods when the policy rate was at the effective lower bound, so I would say it is no longer unconventional.

Given the role of QE and QT in the policy toolkit, it is good to have researchers and policymakers examine how asset purchases work and talk about current issues associated with their implementation. This paper is very timely and thorough in looking across countries and their experiences with QE and QT. There is a lot packed into this work that makes it a little difficult to fully assess in the time we have today. So I will focus my comments on four points: (1) the evidence that the effects of QE are asymmetric to the effects of QT; (2) the execution of QE versus the execution of QT in the United States; (3) the role of announcement effects of QT; and, finally, (4) who has taken the Fed's place in buying assets when we withdraw from the market. I will then end with some thoughts about issues facing the Federal Reserve as we move forward with normalizing our balance sheet.

The Asymmetry of Quantitative Easing versus Quantitative Tightening For me, one of the most interesting results of the paper is that the announcement effects of quantitative easing are much larger than the announcement effects of quantitative tightening. The authors find that announcements of QT have a small but statistically significant effect in increasing government bond yields—about 4 to 8 basis points. But this effect is much smaller, in absolute terms, than the prevailing estimates of the decrease in yields from announcements of QE. The conclusion is that the interest rate effects of QE and QT are asymmetric. For an economist, this result may seem puzzling—why would changing the sign on an action lead to asymmetric effects on prices and real variables?

Ever since central banks initiated QE in response to the Global Financial Crisis, academics have debated its effectiveness. One view is that it has a very limited effect in situations where a central bank is swapping zero interest-bearing reserves for zero interest-bearing shorter-term Treasury securities. Because the two assets would seem to be nearly perfect substitutes, there can be no price effects from altering the composition of the two assets. The central bank is simply swapping two $10 bills for a twenty. If this is true, then undoing the trade via QT has no effect either. It should be symmetrical.

The alternative view, based on market segmentation or preferred habitat theory, is that when a central bank uses reserves to pay for government securities, it is decreasing the supply of these securities to private investors, which will bid up the price and lower the interest rate on government securities. 2 By lowering interest rates on longer-maturity assets, which pay a higher interest rate than reserves, the central bank can stimulate the economy in a manner similar to lowering the policy rate. But by this logic, when QT reverses QE, asset prices should fall and yields should rise in equal magnitude. Thus, any positive effects derived from QE would be reversed when QT occurs. This suggests that QE and QT may cancel each other out in welfare terms. But if there are no net benefits from the action, what is the point of doing it? To illustrate this point, suppose someone is given a weight-loss drug and they lose 80 pounds, but then the drug is taken away and they regain the 80 pounds. What was the point of the exercise if there was no net welfare gain?

To me, for QE to be beneficial on net, there has to be asymmetry in the effects of QE relative to QT. My thinking on this has long been guided by the conclusions of a paper I wrote with Alex Berentsen about optimal stabilization policy, which is what QE and QT ultimately should be about. 3 The gist of the argument is that when shocks and frictions to trading arise suddenly, the central bank can take actions such as injecting reserves to ease trading frictions or credit constraints and improve welfare. But by waiting until the frictions and shocks dissipate before undoing the injections, the positive effects are not reversed. As an example, when a house is on fire, pouring water on the fire will put it out, which has great benefits for all. But when the fire is out, draining the water away does not reignite the fire—the initial benefits are not undone. The punchline here is that QE is conducted under different market conditions than those that occur when QT is done, so it is not surprising that the effects will be different. The authors' findings that QE has asymmetric effects compared to QT is not a puzzle but an indication that central banks timed QE and QT in the right manner such that society was better off.

The Execution of Quantitative Easing versus Quantitative Tightening Turning to the impact of QE and QT on interest rates, analysis often focuses on the term premium. There are three key elements of asset purchases that change the term premium: (1) the expected path of QE, which includes the amount and timing of purchases; (2) the length of time the central bank is expected to hold the additional securities; and (3) the expected path of QT, including the amount and timing of redemptions, which importantly depends on the desired ultimate size of securities holdings (and reserve balances) of the central bank. As soon as an asset purchase program is announced, these expectations are formed, resulting in the term premium effect, or TPE, on interest rates.

Over time, the TPE will change, based on both the passage of time and any updates to the public's expectations for the components I just mentioned. Let me talk about three factors that affect both the expected path of asset purchases and interest rates. These factors are things to keep in mind for future policy decisions.

First, there are two ways that QE can be implemented, and they have different impacts on interest rates. These are what I call closed - or open-ended QE programs. Closed-ended QE programs involve an announcement of a fixed stock of purchases over a fixed period of time. An example of this type of asset purchase program was initiated by the Fed in March 2009. 4 Open-ended QE simply gives a purchase amount per month but no calendar endpoint, so the expected size of the program is unspecified. A set of economic conditions for reducing or ending purchases may be stipulated, but when they will occur is not perfectly predictable. Here, one can think of the Fed's most recent asset purchase program.

At the time of an asset purchase announcement, it will be easier for markets to fully price in a closed-ended program, since its purchase amount and end date are given, whereas the open-ended program's pricing will depend on market expectations for the evolution of the economy. So if one wants a particular impact on interest rates at the announcement date, one might lean toward a closed-ended program or be aware that additional guidance on the expected path of the open-ended program will be needed.

As time passes and the economy evolves, the two programs work differently. One might prefer an open-ended program over time because it dynamically responds to the evolution of economic conditions. The program could be halted or extended as conditions improve or worsen, unlike a closed-ended program. But, of course, the criteria set in the open-ended program must be carefully considered. As I said in a recent FEDS Note and in several speeches, the 2020 criteria for when to begin QT may have been too restrictive and did not allow the Committee to taper as soon and as gradually as desired. 5 Setting the appropriate criteria ahead of time to create the flexibility needed to respond to changing economic and financial conditions is very hard to do.

The second factor affecting the path of asset purchases is that it is very important that QE be credibly followed by QT. If QE is viewed as nothing more than a permanent injection of money into the economy, it would likely create inflation. This was widely predicted back in 2009, but the inflation didn't happen. Why? In my view, it didn't happen because the Fed credibly committed to withdrawing the injected reserves at a later date. Pre-committing to QT is what allows the injection of reserves into the economy without inflation or other longer-run distortions of market pricing. So when starting asset purchases or weighing how to approach asset runoff or sales, it is important that the central bank commit to normalizing its balance sheet.

The third factor is that it is important for a central bank to move carefully as it comes to the end of QT and the desired level of ample reserves. The endpoint should be related to the expectation of the banking system's demand for reserves. In the United States, we saw stresses in money markets in the fall of 2019, when the Fed reduced the level of reserves during balance sheet normalization through July and then there was heavy issuance of Treasury securities in September. The level of reserves likely went a bit too low. 6 Learning from our experiences and trying to understand how the demand for reserves has changed over time suggests moving carefully toward the endpoint of QT.

For this reason, even if QE is an open-ended program, QT is more likely to resemble a closed-ended program. Central banks usually have an idea of how large they want their balance sheet to be when QT ends; therefore, once the pace of QT is announced, markets should be able to effectively price in the entire program at the announcement of the plan. After that, the actual execution of QT is simply validating the beliefs that market participants had at the announcement. This is why many refer to QT as merely draining unneeded reserves, which should be as interesting as watching paint dry.

Quantitative Tightening in the United States Let me now turn more directly to the authors' paper and two of their findings. First, as I mentioned earlier, they find central banks' QT announcements have only a small effect on interest rates. To conduct this analysis, the authors do an event study around QT announcements, which requires them to identify "surprises" in the QT announcements. As the authors acknowledge, this is not a trivial exercise. My comment here is to point out why identifying a QT announcement surprise is challenging when considering examples in the United States.

Let me walk through the evolution of the Fed's QT communications in the spring of 2022 to consider how various communications affected the expected path of QT. 7 Recall that QE ended in March 2022. 8 Heading into April, it was likely that markets expected a redemption path somewhat like the Fed's 2017–2019 QT plan. 9 That plan phased in redemptions over 12 months and ultimately allowed, at most, $30 billion of Treasury securities and $20 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) to be redeemed each month. On April 5, 2022, then-Vice Chair Lael Brainard gave a speech that noted the balance sheet would shrink considerably more rapidly than in the previous case of QT; specifically, she said that "significantly larger caps and a much shorter period to phase in the maximum caps compared with 2017–2019." 10 The next day, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) minutes provided additional information on the expected maximum monthly caps and phase-in period, saying participants generally agreed to a three-month phase-in and caps of $60 billion and $35 billion for Treasury securities and agency MBS, respectively.

Over those two days in April, the markets likely updated their expected QT plans to have sooner and larger redemptions. This change would be associated with a less negative term premium effect, meaning a rise in Treasury yields. The 10-year Treasury yield rose 19 basis points over the two days of the Vice Chair's speech and the FOMC minutes—that is, 12 basis points on the day of her speech and another 7 basis points on the day of the FOMC minutes—and a total of 37 basis points over that week.

About a month later, on May 4, 2022, the FOMC communicated its "Plans for Reducing the Size of the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet." The plan was consistent with the FOMC minutes from April, and there was little change in the 10-year Treasury yield that day and week (negative 4 basis points on the day of the announcement and 2 basis points over the five-day period). So, when doing event studies, it may be difficult to estimate the full impact of QT announcements by simply looking at the formal announcement of the QT plan.

Let me turn to a second point of the paper, about which types of investors have increased their securities holdings as the Fed has reduced its holdings. When a central bank steps away from asset purchases and begins to shrink its balance sheet, a common question is, who will step in and take the central bank's place in buying securities? I always respond by saying, "Why is this important?" If the government bond market is broad and deep, there will be plenty of buyers—there is no need to worry about who will buy the government debt. If the government bond market is not broad or deep, however, then the central bank's actions can have adverse and unwanted effects on prices and market functioning. This would then affect how fast the central bank can reduce its balance sheet and whether it can do so passively or actively.

One could also argue that it matters because knowing the buyers helps one understand the transmission of QT to asset prices and interest rates. Does it matter if it is banks or nonbank financial firms that are doing the buying? Does it matter if it is hedge funds, pension funds, or actual households doing the buying? One needs to have a better understanding of why the question is being asked before one can fully understand the answers to the question.

The authors focus on the reduction in aggregate securities holdings of central banks and find that households and broker-dealers are the main investors absorbing the redeemed securities. For my discussion today, I decided to dig a bit deeper into the Financial Accounts of the United States in two ways. First, I decided to look at each type of security (Treasury securities and agency MBS) individually. 11 For Treasury securities, I also find that since the 2022 start of QT, households have boosted their market share the most, and broker-dealers have also increased their share. For agency MBS, not only has the market shares of those two investor types increased, but so has the market shares of money market funds.

Second, I dug into the household category a bit more. As currently categorized, the Financial Accounts household category includes hedge funds. The Federal Reserve Board is working to segregate hedge funds in this data set. In the interim, the Board publishes separate data on the balance sheets of domestic hedge funds. 12 Using this supplemental data, I find that it is not the hedge funds that are responsible for the increase in household market share. This means the increase is driven by the other household investors: actual households and nonprofit organizations.

What do I make of this finding? My interpretation is that it reinforces the view that the demand for U.S. Treasury securities is broad and deep—the buyers are not a narrow set of deep-pocketed, sophisticated investors but rather the American public. As a result, the pace of runoff is not a problem. As we have seen with the current phase of QT, runoff up to $95 billion a month is not causing substantial strains in financial markets—something that a few years ago would have surprised a lot of people, given the worries about QT that were common prior to 2022.

Normalization Let me conclude with a few comments on where I believe the Fed should be heading as it continues to normalize its balance sheet. By "normalizing" I mean reducing the size of the balance sheet but retaining enough assets to manage monetary policy using an ample-reserves regime.

As the Federal Reserve continues its QT program, I support further thinking about how many more securities to redeem. We have an overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility with take-up of more than $500 billion, and I view these funds as excess liquidity that financial market participants do not want, so this tells me that we can continue to reduce our holdings for some time.

In addition, it is important to remember that we now have a standing repurchase agreement facility (SRF). The SRF serves as a backstop in money markets, since it takes in Treasury securities as well as agency MBS and puts reserves in the banking system. This facility may allow banks to lower the level of reserves below what reserves would be without the facility, and it may provide a signal for when reserves are getting close to ample.

Chair Powell has noted that the FOMC will begin to discuss slowing our redemptions at our FOMC meeting this month, which will help us transition into whatever definition of "ample" we deem appropriate. Changing our pace of redemptions will occur when the Committee makes a decision to do so, and the timing will be independent of any changes to the policy rate target. Balance sheet plans are about getting liquidity levels right and approaching "ample" at the correct speed. They do not imply anything about the stance of interest rate policy, which is focused on influencing the macroeconomy and achieving our dual mandate.

Thinking about longer-term issues related to the Fed's portfolio, I want to mention two things. First, I would like to see the Fed's agency MBS holdings go to zero. Agency MBS holdings have been slow to run off the portfolio, at a recent monthly average of about $15 billion, because the underlying mortgages have very low interest rates and prepayments are quite small. I believe it is important to see a continued reduction in these holdings.

Second, I would like to see a shift in Treasury holdings toward a larger share of shorter-dated Treasury securities. Prior to the Global Financial Crisis, we held approximately one-third of our portfolio in Treasury bills. 13 Today, bills are less than 5 percent of our Treasury holdings and less than 3 percent of our total securities holdings. Moving toward more Treasury bills would shift the maturity structure more toward our policy rate—the overnight federal funds rate—and allow our income and expenses to rise and fall together as the FOMC increases and cuts the target range. This approach could also assist a future asset purchase program because we could let the short-term securities roll off the portfolio and not increase the balance sheet. 14 This is an issue the FOMC will need to decide in the next couple of years.

In conclusion, let me be clear that this is a great paper that will serve as a major reference for researchers and central banks. The authors' analysis will surely have a much longer shelf life than my discussion of it.
