November 20, 2024

Governor Michelle W. Bowman

At the Forum Club of the Palm Beaches, West Palm Beach, Florida

Good afternoon. 1 It is a pleasure to join you for today's meeting of the Forum Club of the Palm Beaches. It is truly humbling for me to be invited to speak to your membership, in the company of the many influential leaders, authors, and other public figures this organization has hosted since its founding in 1976.
November 20, 2024

Governor Lisa D. Cook

At the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia

Thank you, Christa. It is wonderful to be with you here on the University of Virginia's beautiful campus. This is my first visit here as an adult. As a child, I was fortunate enough to be able to attend the commencement ceremony of my aunt and uncle, who received their doctoral degrees from UVA several decades ago. My family and I are grateful to the University of Virginia for all the educational opportunities it has afforded us over the years. I look forward to connecting with many of the exceptional students and faculty during my visit. 1

As a member of the Federal Reserve Board, I always find it a pleasure to hear from people in communities across the country and to share some views of my own. At the Fed, I am committed to pursuing the best policy to achieve the dual-mandate goals given to us by Congress of maximum employment and price stability. Today, I would like to share with you my outlook for the economy, including some international comparisons of productivity and inflation, and offer my views on U.S. monetary policy.

Broadly, I view the economy as being in a good position. Inflation has substantially eased from its peak in mid-2022, though core inflation remains somewhat elevated. Unemployment remains historically low, but the labor market is no longer overheated. Economic growth has been robust this year, and I forecast the expansion will continue. Looking ahead, I remain confident that inflation is moving sustainably toward our 2 percent objective, even if the path is occasionally bumpy. Meanwhile, I see employment risks as weighted to the downside, but those risks appear to have diminished somewhat in recent months.

Inflation Inflation, as measured by the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index, has eased notably from a peak of 7.2 percent in June 2022. Estimates based on the consumer price index and other data released last week indicate that total PCE prices rose 2.3 percent over the 12 months ending in October. Core PCE prices—which exclude the volatile food and energy categories—increased 2.8 percent, down from a peak of 5.6 percent in February 2022.

Despite this significant progress on disinflation, the elevated core figure suggests that we have further to go before credibly achieving our inflation target of 2 percent. Although most price indicators suggest that progress is ongoing, I anticipate bumps along the road. For instance, when measured on a monthly basis, estimated core PCE inflation stepped up in September and October after four months of lower readings. Even so, I still see headline and core inflation falling to 2.2 percent next year and to lower levels after that. Moreover, disinflation has been widespread across a broad range of goods and services. Taken together, recent data support my view that the disinflationary process is continuing.

Thinking of the components of inflation, core goods and core services inflation excluding housing are now at rates consistent with previous periods when inflation averaged about 2 percent. As a result, housing services account for most of the excess of core inflation over our target. Despite a slowing in rent increases for new tenants over the past two years, recent research from the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland suggests that existing rents for continuing tenants may still be notably below new tenant rent levels. 2 Existing rents rising toward market rent levels is keeping housing services inflation temporarily elevated. My view is that housing services inflation will come down gradually over the next two years as the earlier slowing of growth in new tenant rent feeds through into the overall rate.

Recently, other inflation factors have been subdued. Core import prices have continued to step down from the surprisingly strong pace in the first half of the year. Global oil prices have fluctuated, largely in response to developments in the Middle East, but are back near the lows reached in late summer.
