February 05, 2025

Governor Michelle W. Bowman

At the Kansas Bankers Association Government Relations Conference, Topeka, Kansas

Governor Bowman presented identical remarks at the 2025 Wisconsin Bankers Association Bank Executives Conference, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, on February 7, 2025, and at the 2025 Iowa Bankers Association Bank Management and Policy Conference, Des Moines, Iowa (virtual), on February 11, 2025.

Thank you for the invitation to speak to you today. 1 It is a pleasure to be with you. I always enjoy the opportunity to meet bankers from across the country to learn about the issues that are important to you. Recently, I have observed a shift in tone when I talk to bankers about the bank regulatory environment. Bankers are cautiously optimistic that we will see meaningful reform that right-sizes regulation and supervisory approach, reforms that—if executed appropriately—should help the banking system promote economic growth in a safe and sound manner. Today, I will share my views on a number of issues related to banking regulation and supervision, including the importance of tailoring, having a problem-focused approach to bank regulation and supervision, and the imperative of innovation in the banking system.

One of the unique characteristics of the U.S. banking system is the broad scope of institutions it includes and the wide range of customers and communities it serves. Given this wide variety of institutions, regulators must strive to foster a financial system that enables each and every bank, no matter its size, to thrive, supporting a vibrant economy and financial system. We must also be sensitive to emerging issues and trends that require attention, whether that be unintended consequences from capital requirements, the incentives created by our approach to regulatory applications, and to ensure legal compliance.

Tailoring The approach to regulation and supervision should promote a healthy and vibrant banking system. One key element of a regulatory approach that does so, and one that I often highlight, is the use of "tailoring" in the regulatory framework. For those familiar with my philosophy on bank regulation and supervision, my interest and focus on tailoring will come as no surprise. 2 In its most basic form, it is difficult to disagree with the virtue of regulatory and supervisory tailoring—calibrating the requirements and expectations imposed on a firm based on its size, business model, risk profile, and complexity—as a reasonable, appropriate, and responsible approach for bank regulation and supervision. In fact, tailoring is embedded in the statutory fabric of the Federal Reserve's bank regulatory responsibilities. 3

The bank regulatory framework inherently includes significant costs—both the cost of operating the banking agencies and the cost to the banking industry of complying with regulations, the examination process, and supplying information to regulators both through formal information collections and through one-off requests. In the aggregate, these costs can ultimately affect the price and availability of credit, geographic access to banking services, and the broader economy. The cost of this framework—both to regulators and to the industry—reflects layers of policy decisions over many years. But this framework could be more effective in balancing the mandate to promote safety and soundness with the need to have a banking system that promotes economic growth.

Let's consider costs. As regulatory and supervisory demands grow, there is often parallel growth in the staff and budgets of the banking agencies. We should not only be cognizant of these costs, but we should act in a way that requires efficiency while ensuring safety and soundness. Some degree of elasticity in regulator capacity is necessary to respond to evolving economic and banking conditions, as well as emerging risks, but there must be reasonable constraints on banking agency growth. Expansion of the regulatory framework is not a cost-free endeavor. These costs are shouldered by taxpayers, banks, and, ultimately, bank customers.

The bank regulatory framework has great potential to provide significant benefits, including supporting an innovative banking system that enhances trust and confidence in our institutions and promotes safety and soundness. When we consider the benefits and the costs, we can institute greater efficiencies in both banking regulation and in the banking industry itself. The framework is complex, and the various elements of this framework are intended to work in a complementary way. As banks evolve—by growing larger or by engaging in new activities—tailoring can help us to quickly recalibrate requirements in light of the new risks posed by the firm.

But the regulatory framework, especially how supervisors prioritize its application to the banking industry, can pose a serious threat to a bank's viability. For example, imposing the same regulatory requirements on banks with assets of $2 billion to $2 trillion under the new rules implementing the Community Reinvestment Act demonstrated a missed opportunity to promote greater effectiveness and efficiency. 4 I question the wisdom of applying the same evaluation standards to banks within such a broad range.

Likewise, supervisory guidance can provide fertile ground to differentiate supervisory expectations under a more tailored approach. While supervisory guidance is not binding on banks as a legal matter, it can signal how regulators think about particular risks and activities, and often drives community banks to reallocate resources in a way that may not be necessary or appropriate. The Fed's guidance on third-party risk management is an example of this. Originally, this guidance was published in a way that applied to all banks, including community banks. Yet it was acknowledged even at the time of publication that it had known shortcomings, particularly in terms of its administration and lack of clarity for community banks. 5

Tailoring is important for all banks, but it is particularly important for community banks. There are real costs not only to banks, but to communities, when the framework is insufficiently tailored, as community banks faced with excessive regulatory burdens may be forced to raise prices or seek to merge or be acquired. These banks often reach unbanked or underbanked corners of the U.S. economy, not only in terms of the customers they serve but also in terms of their geographic footprint. We are all familiar with banking deserts and the challenges many legitimate and law-abiding businesses and consumers have in accessing basic banking services and credit. It is difficult to imagine that a system with far fewer banks would as effectively serve U.S. banking and credit needs and sufficiently support economic growth.

It is imperative that we keep the benefits of tailoring in focus as the bank regulatory framework evolves. A tailored regulatory and supervisory approach can help inform our policies on a wide range of industry issues that are likely to emerge in the coming years.

Problem-Based Solutions One of the most difficult challenges on the regulatory front is prioritization, both for banks managing their businesses and for regulators deciding how to fulfill their responsibilities. At a basic level, the role of regulators is dictated by statute. Congress granted the Federal Reserve and other banking agencies broad statutory powers but has constrained how those powers may be directed through the use of statutory mandates, including to promote a safe and sound banking system, and broader U.S. financial stability. In the execution of these responsibilities, the Federal Reserve must also balance the need to act in a way that enables the banking system to serve the U.S. economy and promote economic growth. While these objectives are not incompatible, they do require us to consider tradeoffs when establishing policy.

How can regulators best meet these responsibilities? As many of you may already know, I strongly believe in a pragmatic approach to policymaking. 6 This requires us to identify the problem we are trying to solve, determine whether we are the appropriate regulator to address the problem based on our statutory mandates and authorities, and explore options for addressing the identified issue.

This approach of pragmatic problem-solving also applies to supervision, where process improvements could improve functioning. The Federal Reserve exercises its supervisory responsibilities by supervisory portfolio, with each portfolio relying on a combination of Board and Reserve Bank staff. 7 It is important that responsibility for supervisory decisions be paired with accountability for such decisions, which can be complicated depending on the different roles played by Board and Reserve Bank staffs, and as institutions change supervisory portfolios. The misalignment of responsibility and accountability detracts from effective supervision.

Our supervisory program should require strong examiner training, rely on examiner expertise in the conduct of examinations, and work in partnership with state bank supervisors. Doing so will allow us to leverage the practical experience and judgment of examination staff—characteristics that are necessary for effective supervision—while preserving the role of the Board to delegate and provide Reserve Bank oversight. Examinations cannot be just a box-checking exercise. We must rely on well-trained and experienced examiners empowered to exercise independent judgment and ask questions, which leads to stronger and more effective supervision.

As we look at the banking system, including the regulatory framework, we must focus on those issues that are most important to advancing statutory priorities. There is always the risk of misidentification and mis-prioritization, and that we fail to take appropriately robust action on key issues or focus on issues that are less material to a bank's safety and soundness. Our goal should be to develop a better filter to promote appropriate and effective prioritization.

Treasury market functioning Where regulation may create or exacerbate financial stability risks, we need to take a close look at whether those risks are justified by the safety and soundness benefits of the regulation. The erosion of liquidity in U.S. Treasury markets provides a good example of unintended consequences and the need to evaluate tradeoffs in regulation. This issue is a byproduct of several important dynamics: (1) the role of large banks in the intermediation of U.S. Treasury markets, (2) the growth of "safe" assets in the banking system, and (3) the increase in leverage-based capital requirements becoming the binding capital constraint on some large banks. While regulators may not have tools to address all of these dynamics, clearly the adverse impact of leverage-based capital requirements falls within the banking regulators' scope of responsibility.

Issues with Treasury market functioning have been known for quite some time. We have seen a persistent trend of low liquidity in U.S. Treasury markets for several years, which has been noted in the Board's semiannual Financial Stability Report . 8 Low liquidity can create more volatility in prices, exacerbate the effects of market shocks, and can threaten market functioning. Treasury market functioning and liquidity will likely be affected by the Securities and Exchange Commission's central clearing requirement for U.S. Treasuries, which may improve market functioning. In addition, the Federal Reserve's Standing Repo Facility may also help to promote smooth functioning in the Treasury market. But there is uncertainty regarding how the volume of Treasury securities issued and outstanding, and changes to the Fed's balance sheet over time, may affect this.

We have seen Treasury markets experience stress events as recently as the September 2019 repo market stress, and the so-called "dash for cash" in March of 2020. Both of these events raised concerns about the resiliency of U.S. Treasury markets. Therefore, we should continue to actively monitor indicators of market function, particularly whether Treasury market functioning improves over time, thereby enabling it to withstand future shocks.

The banking regulators are uniquely positioned to not only analyze but also remediate components of the bank regulatory framework that may exacerbate Treasury market illiquidity. Large bank-affiliated primary dealers play an important role in the intermediation of U.S. Treasury markets. These dealers are not immune or insulated from the effect of banking regulation. While many factors can affect market liquidity, including interest rate volatility and Treasury market saturation, we must consider whether some of the pressure is a byproduct of bank regulation.

The Federal Reserve has previously intervened to address market stress and support Treasury market functioning, for example, by temporarily excluding Fed reserves and Treasuries from the denominator of the supplemental leverage ratio (SLR). 9 Treasury markets play a critical role in the U.S. and global financial systems, and we should take action to address the unintended consequences of bank regulation, while ensuring the framework continues to promote safety, soundness, and financial stability. 10

Leverage ratios do not differentiate between the risk of certain asset classes or exposures, and therefore appropriately operate as a backstop to risk-based capital requirements. However, in periods of banks' balance sheet expansion—as during COVID-19 when we saw significant deposit inflows—leverage ratios can become the binding constraint on banks and their affiliates, increasing the amount of required capital based on increased balance sheet size regardless of risk. When constrained in this way, bank-affiliated primary dealers may pull back on market intermediation activities.

Where we can take proactive regulatory measures to ensure that primary dealers have adequate balance sheet capacity to intermediate Treasury markets, we should do so. This could include amending the leverage ratio and G-SIB surcharge regulations for the largest U.S. banks. Adopting regulatory changes to mitigate these concerns may not be sufficient to ensure market liquidity, but it would be an important step toward building resiliency in advance of future stress events. In my view, it would be better to fix the roof now, while the sun is shining, by addressing over-calibrated leverage ratio requirements, and considering the unintended consequences of any future capital reforms.

Stress testing I will now turn to another area that the Board has already identified as a priority for review—stress testing. Stress testing can be an important supervisory tool, but its implementation, outcomes and process have raised significant questions and concerns about whether it is useful in identifying systemic weaknesses. In its current structure, it is an opaque test hidden from public scrutiny that is used to establish variable binding capital requirements on large banks. Our review should consider whether it is transparent and fair, and whether there are technical improvements that could enhance the reliability and credibility of the test and its results. 11

In its current form, stress testing is likely deficient on each of these fronts. Transparency promotes fairness, as regulated entities and the public can better understand why and how our actions further our goals. When we identify areas that suffer from a lack of transparency, we should act promptly to address those concerns. On December 23 of last year, the Fed announced that it would soon seek public comment on "significant changes" to the stress testing process designed to improve transparency of the tests and reduce volatility of the resulting stress capital buffers that apply to large financial institutions . 12 Given my longstanding support for revisiting the stress testing framework to promote transparency and reduce volatility, I am pleased with this development. 13

Fraud Finally, I would like to address the problem of fraud, particularly check fraud, which has grown in frequency and impact over the past several years. Fraud continues to harm banks, damaging the perceived safety of the banking system, and importantly hurting consumers who are the victims of fraudulent activity. Sometimes fraudsters target vulnerable populations, like the elderly, who are particularly susceptible to certain forms of fraud.

As I have noted in the past, efforts by regulators have been frustratingly slow to advance, and seem to have done little to address the underlying root causes of this increase in fraud. Why has this important issue failed to garner greater attention from all of the appropriate regulatory and law enforcement bodies? Different governmental agencies may share an important role in addressing this problem, but the need for a joint and coordinated solution does not excuse collective inaction.

Fraud is perhaps the most consistent issue raised when I speak with bankers. Often the concerns note frustrations with the tools available to fight fraud and frictions dealing with counterparties in investigating and addressing fraud. The costs of prevention, detection, and remediation can also be substantial, but so can the costs of navigating these issues dealing with affected bank customers. We are overdue for more assertive action to protect bank customers and the financial system.

The Innovation Imperative Innovation has always been a priority for banks of all sizes and business models. Banks in the U.S. have a long history of developing and implementing new technologies, and innovation has the potential to make the banking and payment systems faster and more efficient, to bring new products and services to customers, and even to enhance safety and soundness.

Regulators must be open to innovation in the banking system. Our goal should be to build and support a clear and sensible regulatory framework that anticipates ongoing and evolving innovation—one that allows the private sector to innovate while also maintaining appropriate safeguards. We must promote innovation through transparency and open communication, including demonstrating a willingness to engage during the development process. Financial institutions should know what activities are permitted, and the supervisory and regulatory expectations that will accompany their activities. By providing clarity and consistency, we can encourage long-term business investment, while also continuing to support today's products and services. A clear regulatory framework would also empower supervisors to focus on safety and soundness, ensuring a safe and efficient banking and payment system.

Absent clearer rules of the road, we run the risk of reducing the availability of banking services. Bank regulatory policy should address the needs of the unbanked and expand the availability of banking services. It should not be used to limit or exclude access to banking services for legitimate customers and businesses in a way that is meant to further unrelated policy goals, sometimes referred to as "de-banking" or bank "de-risking." Credit decisions should not be dictated by banking regulations or supervisory messages. Ultimately, bankers are and should be responsible for their own credit allocation decisions.

Regulators must change approaches that have resulted in credit allocation decisions, research how banks are making decisions related to which customers they serve, and promote an environment that allows legitimate bank customers to obtain banking services.

New technologies and services often require novel regulatory and supervisory approaches, and we recognize that past approaches will likely not be effective. Often regulators take a "more is better" approach to regulation and guidance. Over the past several years, the banking industry has faced an onslaught of proposed and final regulations and guidance, materials that require a significant time commitment to review, to comment on, and to implement. Many times, these require changes to policies and procedures or risk-management practices.

Fundamentally though, this "more is better" approach fails to address the core criticisms, including both an overall lack of transparency, and the perception (and perhaps reality?) that regulators have been overly hostile to innovation, including banks' involvement in any capacity with digital assets, the use of artificial intelligence, and the availability of new technologies and providers to access the payment system.

As a banker, state bank commissioner, and as a Board member, I have made the case for a more open-minded approach to innovation, including by co-hosting an informational event for bankers together with three other bank commissioners on distributed ledger technology and banking innovation just prior to joining the Board. 14 We must prioritize understanding the risks and benefits of new technologies before developing a supervisory posture, especially when applying rules and using the "soft" power of supervision to discourage its use. Instead, we must create a supervisory and regulatory environment that facilitates reasonable and supportive approaches. The natural posture of a regulator may be to emphasize safety and soundness above all other objectives, but doing so will ultimately stifle innovation and threaten the long-term health and utility of the banking system.

Closing Thoughts Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. The financial system is constantly evolving, and our regulatory approach must anticipate this evolution. We must return to a regulatory approach that emphasizes appropriate tailoring of regulatory requirements and supervisory expectations and take a pragmatic approach in identifying and remediating the most pressing issues. And we must encourage ongoing innovation in the banking and financial systems.
February 05, 2025

Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson

At Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania

Thank you, Professor O'Connell, for that kind introduction and for the opportunity to talk to this group. 1 I am delighted to be back at Swarthmore College. This special community brings back fond memories of fantastic students, great colleagues, and pedagogical excellence.

Slide 1

Yesterday, I discussed my outlook for the current U.S. economy. I highlighted how the economy is growing and appears to be roughly in balance, with low unemployment and declining inflation. Today, I will review some of the historical evidence pertaining to periods when the Federal Reserve has achieved both components of its dual mandate, maximum employment and stable prices, on a sustained basis—that is, periods of long non-inflationary economic expansions. My title question is whether economic evidence indicates that such expansions also result in greater shared prosperity.

My focus will be on the labor market. A reason for this focus is that for many individuals, their employment attachment is a key determinant of their household's overall well-being. My approach will be to compare the current labor market with the labor market at the end of 2019—that is, at the end of the most recent long, non-inflationary expansion. Such a comparison provides a lens through which to view the prospects for broadly shared prosperity fostered by the current U.S. labor market.

The remainder of my talk is organized as follows. First, I describe the labor market at the end of 2019. After that, I discuss the state of the labor market in the immediate aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic. Then, I describe the current labor market situation. Next, I discuss possible reasons why strong labor markets facilitate broad-based prosperity. Before concluding, I consider whether the benefits of long expansions are persistent.

The Labor Market on the Eve of the COVID-19 Pandemic Let's begin the exploration of my title question with a careful look at the situation during the historically strong labor market on the eve of the COVID-19 pandemic. Following the 2007-09 Global Financial Crisis, the U.S. economy expanded for 128 consecutive months, making it the longest economic expansion in U.S. history. During this period, as shown in figure 1 , the aggregate unemployment rate fell steadily from a peak of 10 percent in October 2009 to 3.5 percent in September 2019, the lowest recorded in nearly 50 years. Job opportunities were plentiful in this strong labor market, with the ratio of vacancies to job seekers hovering around 1.2 throughout 2019, implying that businesses were seeking to fill more open positions than there were workers actively searching for employment. Moreover, while some long economic expansions have led to an unwelcome rise in prices, inflation remained low and stable. Indeed, the Federal Reserve was grappling with inflation somewhat below, rather than above, its longer-run 2 percent target.

In addition, and perhaps related to the length of the expansion, the pre-pandemic labor market was remarkable in terms of the broad-based gains seen across demographic groups, which contributed to a historic narrowing of employment disparities. For instance, as shown in figure 2 , the unemployment rate among African Americans, the solid red line, has usually been about twice as high as that for white individuals, the solid blue line, and is more sensitive to the state of the business cycle. The unemployment rate among Hispanics, the dotted green line, falls between these two groups. In late 2019, however, both African American and Hispanic unemployment rates had fallen to the lowest levels on record up to that point, significantly narrowing the persistent unemployment gaps between these groups. Before this, the greatest improvement in the unemployment rate among African Americans was at the end of the 1991–2001 economic expansion, which itself was the second longest expansion in U.S. history. But in 2019, the unemployment rate for African Americans was about 2 percentage points lower than it was in early 2001.

The influence of the long expansion on employment gaps also was evident for other groups of workers. Like minorities, individuals with less education, and especially those who have not completed high school, also experience higher cyclical volatility in their employment. 2 In 2019, as shown in figure 3 , the unemployment rate gaps between workers with less than a high school education, the solid red line, and those who have attained at least a bachelor's degree, the solid purple line, also were near multidecade lows. Further, the strong labor market created new opportunities for teens and younger workers, groups whose employment prospects, and even long-term career trajectories, are especially sensitive to the cyclical state of the economy. 3

Beyond narrowing gaps between workers actively searching for a job, the strong pre-pandemic labor market also helped draw many new participants into the labor force. Among prime-age workers, those aged 25 to 54, the labor force participation rate began rising again around 2015, as shown in figure 4 , reversing a declining trend. This was true among both men, the solid black line, whose participation had been steadily declining since the 1950s, and women, the dashed red line, whose participation had previously peaked in early 2000. Labor force participation among women was rising especially briskly in the months just before the pandemic, essentially reversing its entire decline over the previous 20 years. While this partially reflects broader demographic trends such as increasing educational attainment, participation was rising for both women with and without a college degree after 2015, suggesting that the strong labor market played a part in this reversal.

Turning now from employment and participation to earnings, nominal wages were growing solidly before the pandemic. As with gains in employment, the strong labor market was especially beneficial for some groups. Most noticeably, as shown in figure 5 , wage growth for the bottom quartile of earners, the solid red line, started to pick up about five years into the expansion, in late 2014, and by 2019 was significantly stronger than for workers in higher earnings quartiles, the solid purple line. 4 These differences in wage growth are important, as they imply convergence in levels and, therefore, declining wage inequality as the bottom of the distribution catches up to higher earners. Similarly, wages were growing faster for non-white workers relative to white workers in 2019, though differences by educational attainment were less pronounced at the time.

Looking back now, the U.S. economy in 2019 was in a good place. The labor market was tight but not overheating, bringing widespread gains to workers. Further, had it not been for the sudden and dramatic interruption of the COVID-19 pandemic, this strong labor market was expected to persist. In December 2019, the median Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participant expected the aggregate unemployment rate to remain below 4 percent through the end of 2022 while inflation was expected to move back up to the Committee's 2 percent objective. 5 Had this long, non-inflationary expansion continued as the Committee forecast, gaps in employment and earnings across groups may have continued to narrow as well.

The Labor Market Following the COVID-19 Pandemic The expansion, however, was cut short by the COVID-19 pandemic. In April 2020, the unemployment rate, as shown in figure 6 , briefly surged to 14.8 percent, its highest rate since the Great Depression while the share of Americans seeking jobs (not shown) plummeted. Moreover, those same groups that had benefited from the strong pre-pandemic labor market—African American and Hispanic workers, women, and individuals without a college degree—generally fared worse at the onset of the pandemic. Although some of these groups typically experience greater losses in economic downturns, factors unique to the pandemic, including greater exposure to the industries most affected by lockdowns, also contributed to disparities in job losses. For instance, unlike a typical recession, the pandemic disproportionately affected service industries, which employ a larger share of women than industries like construction and manufacturing, which are generally more cyclically sensitive.

Just as the pandemic itself led to unprecedented losses in the labor market, the subsequent recovery was unprecedented in many ways. As the health risk abated and the economy reopened, labor demand surged as businesses attempted to re-hire workers, but many workers remained on the sidelines. By late 2021, the labor force participation rate was still well below its pre-pandemic level. Vacancies rose to record levels, while, at the same time, quits, as shown in figure 7 , surged as workers sought out new job opportunities, leading some to refer to the post-pandemic recovery as the "Great Resignation." Consequently, as shown in figure 8 , the gap between available jobs, the solid black line, and available workers, the dashed red line, which had been just over 1 million positions in late 2019, widened to over 6 million, the equivalent of two job openings for every unemployed worker. This was an exceptionally tight labor market, far exceeding any in recent history, including the labor market before the pandemic.

The strong post-pandemic aggregate economy reversed the disparities between groups that initially widened in 2020. The aggregate unemployment rate fell to 3.4 percent in April 2023, its lowest since 1969. That same month, the unemployment rate for African Americans fell to 4.8 percent, the lowest level on record and 1/2 percentage point below the previous record set in 2019, as shown in figure 9 by the red solid line, which is the difference between the unemployment rate for African Americans and its own average in the year 2019.

Although labor force participation was initially slower to recover, the labor force participation rate among prime-age women climbed to its highest level ever in 2023, well above even pre-pandemic levels, as shown in figure 10 by the red dashed line, which is the difference between the labor force participation rate for women and its own average in the year 2019.

The tight labor market also led to a surge in nominal wage growth, especially for workers lower in the earnings distribution. In fact, as shown in figure 11 , wage growth for low-wage workers, the solid red line, was strong enough, with a peak wage growth close to 7.5 percent in 2022, to drive a meaningful compression in the aggregate wage distribution (not shown). Economic research suggests that the pandemic recovery reversed around one-third of the increase in the aggregate ratio of the 90th percentile to the 10th percentile wage inequality since the 1980s. 6 These gains at the bottom of the income distribution also were reflected in the experience of different demographic groups, as shown in figure 12 , with stronger wage growth for nonwhite workers, the dashed red line, relative to white workers, the solid black line, and, unlike even the pre-pandemic expansion, for workers with a high school education or less relative to those with a bachelor's degree or more.

Unlike the noninflationary pre-pandemic expansion, however, these nominal wage gains coincided with rising prices, reducing many workers' actual purchasing power. Real wage growth deflated by the personal consumption expenditures price index, which adjusts for the effect of inflation on workers' purchasing power, was negative for many workers in 2022, despite strong aggregate employment growth. Further, the costs of inflation also vary across groups, and there is evidence that rising prices may hurt lower-income populations more. 7 This underscores the connection between the two components of the Federal Reserve's dual mandate to promote both maximum employment and stable prices, since the benefits of strong labor markets are eroded when accompanied by an unwelcome rise in inflation.

The Current Labor Market Situation Let me turn now to the labor market situation more recently. As the economy has recovered from the pandemic, the labor market has come into better balance. By mid-2024, the gap between available jobs and available workers—I'll show that figure again here—had essentially returned to where it was in 2019, reflecting both a decline in vacancies and improvements in labor supply. Various indicators pointed to a labor market that was still tight, but no longer overheating.

Currently, the labor market remains solid, on balance, and inflation continues a bumpy descent toward the FOMC's 2 percent objective. Layoff activity and initial claims for unemployment insurance, shown in figure 13 , remain low by historical standards even as job openings have moved down to more normal levels. The unemployment rate appears to have leveled off close to what the median FOMC participant currently sees as its long-run sustainable level of 4.2 percent. 8 While employment gaps between certain demographic groups have widened a touch since 2022, they remain historically narrow. Further, a welcome development as inflation has moderated is that real wage growth has picked up even as nominal wage growth has slowed. Though wages are now growing similarly across demographic groups, the narrowing of the wage gap across demographic groups realized in 2021 and 2022 persists.

How Do Strong Labor Markets Facilitate Broad-Based Prosperity? Looking back at long, noninflationary episodes like the pre-pandemic expansion raises the question of why strong labor markets have been especially beneficial for certain demographic groups. Although the literature has not reached a definite conclusion to this question, researchers have pointed to several economic mechanisms that may help explain these patterns.

In 1973, the economist Arthur Okun argued that "high-pressure" labor markets—such as those in 2019 and during the pandemic recovery—allowed workers to move up the job ladder, creating new opportunities for individuals on the margins of the labor market. 9 , 10 Further, he argued that when job openings are difficult to fill, employers relax hiring standards, creating new opportunities for individuals who otherwise might struggle to find employment. Consistent with this argument, economic research shows that as the labor market strengthened from 2010 to 2014, employers reduced education and experience requirements in online job postings. 11 Economic research also highlights the role of more productive job-worker matches as tight labor markets facilitate a re-allocation of labor to better and more productive jobs. 12 On the participation side, the labor force participation rate tends to respond to business cycles with a significantly longer lag than the unemployment rate, for instance, due to the stickiness of decisions related to caregiving or educational responsibilities. This suggests that long expansions are especially important for drawing non-participants back into the labor market. 13

Of course, each business cycle is different, making it difficult to draw general conclusions from past episodes. The pandemic recovery, for example, led to a rise in retirements, far more than what would have been expected given population aging. 14 On the downside, this contributed to the significant shortage of workers as the economy was reopening. On the upside, it may have created more opportunities for younger workers to move up the job ladder than is typical during a normal expansion, making Okun's argument especially relevant. The COVID-19 pandemic also was a remarkable reallocation shock, and elevated quits and job switching may have improved the quality of matches between businesses and workers more than usual, potentially contributing to strong productivity growth and wage gains.

Perhaps paradoxically, excessively tight labor markets may not be beneficial to lower-wage workers in the long run. Some economists argue that hiring difficulties may lead firms to adopt technologies that substitute, rather than complement, workers, ultimately reducing labor demand. 15 Similarly, an overheating labor market may lead some workers to prioritize short-term gains over longer-term career stability. Empirical evidence, for example, suggests that during economic expansions some young people choose to take an unstable job that is likely to disappear in the next recession, rather than invest in training opportunities. 16

Are the Benefits of Long Expansions Lasting? Another key question for policymakers is whether the benefits of long expansions can be sustained, given that the same groups who benefit disproportionately from strong labor markets also fare worse in recessions. Again, the literature, while not conclusive, offers some reasons for cautious optimism. There is some empirical evidence that suggests that the benefits of tight labor markets are somewhat persistent, at least for African Americans and women. 17 The fact that labor market disparities that worsened during the pandemic returned to their pre-pandemic levels so quickly following the pandemic may be another reason to be hopeful.

Conclusion Let me conclude by offering an answer to my title question. The weight of the historical evidence I discussed today suggests that broadly shared economic prosperity is more likely when the economy grows over time with low unemployment and stable prices. While the early part of the current expansion was inflationary, the intent of monetary policy actions over the past few years has been to return us to a prolonged period where prices are stable and the labor market remains solid. The historical experience of the U.S. labor market suggests that long, noninflationary expansions are associated with narrower gaps in employment and earnings, with minority groups and less-educated workers benefiting disproportionately from sustained periods of strong economic growth. Such benefits can help make up for the disproportionate losses experienced by the same groups during economic downturns and, in some cases, may even lead to lasting gains.

Finally, let me return to where I started, the Federal Reserve's dual mandate: maximum employment and stable prices. The historical evidence that I have reviewed tonight suggests that shared prosperity is a byproduct of sustained accomplishment of our mission.

Thank you.

Slide 18

References Aaronson, Stephanie R., Mary C. Daly, William L. Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019). " Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF) " Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 333–75.

Akerlof, George A., Andrew K. Rose, and Janet L. Yellen (1988). " Job Switching and Job Satisfaction in the U.S. Labor Market (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2, pp. 495–582.

Autor, David, Arindrajit Dube, and Annie McGrew (2023). " The Unexpected Compression: Competition at Work in the Low Wage Labor Market ," NBER Working Paper Series 31010. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March (revised May 2024).

Betts, Julian R., and Laurel L. McFarland (1995). "Safe Port in a Storm: The Impact of Labor Market Conditions on Community College Enrollments," Journal of Human Resources, vol. 30 (Autumn), pp. 741–65.
