April 22, 2025

Vice Chair Philip N. Jefferson

At the Economic Mobility Summit, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Thank you, Dr. Singleton, for the kind introduction and for the opportunity to speak here today. 1 It is great to be back in Philadelphia, and I look forward to today's discussions on economic mobility.

Title slide

As monetary policymakers, my colleagues and I on the Federal Open Market Committee do not have direct control over economic mobility in the U.S. Our key monetary policy tools are not designed to address this issue, nor is economic mobility part of our mandate. However, our dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability has implications for a wide range of economic outcomes, including economic mobility. This leads to many important questions about the relationship between the dual mandate and economic mobility. In my remarks, I want to address two such questions. First, does meeting the dual mandate facilitate economic mobility? And second, does economic mobility matter for the conduct of monetary policy?

In today's talk , I will discuss my views on these questions, but I will not be able to provide definitive answers. Rather, I hope that posing these questions and relaying some of my own thoughts will lead to further discussions during this conference and beyond. Before turning to these questions, let me start with a brief overview of intergenerational mobility in the U.S.

Taking Stock of Economic Mobility Economic mobility, the ability to move up the economic ladder, is at the heart of the American dream. We tell our children that in the U.S., if you work hard and play by the rules, you can have a secure and successful financial future no matter where you start. We continue to believe strongly in this part of the American dream and remain optimistic that hard work is a primary determinant of later-life success. In a survey from 2019, when respondents were asked which factors are essential or very important to getting ahead in life, nearly 90 percent identified hard work, and only 30 percent indicated coming from a wealthy family. 2

Policymakers have long been aware of the importance of economic mobility. To illustrate that, let me share a quote from former Federal Reserve Chair Ben Bernanke: "Equality of economic opportunity appeals to our sense of fairness, certainly, but it also strengthens our economy. If each person is free to develop and apply his or her talents to the greatest extent possible, then both the individual and the economy benefit." 3

With these sentiments of what Americans and policymakers think and feel about mobility in mind, let me turn to some evidence on economic mobility in the U.S. One common way to measure economic mobility is to relate an individual's income in adulthood to their family income during childhood. The measure I am showing here —from Harvard economist Raj Chetty and coauthors—is likely familiar to many of you. 4 It shows a relative intergenerational mobility measure, also known as the "rank–rank" relationship. This measure relates a child's ranking in the income distribution as an adult, shown on the vertical axis, to the child's family income rank during childhood, shown on the horizontal axis.

The upward slope of the line implies that children born into lower-income families tend to be lower on the income distribution as adults. For example, a child born to the richest parents is, on average, 30 percentage points higher in the income distribution as an adult compared with a child born to the poorest parents. This difference in the relative standing in the income distribution as an adult translates into meaningful differences in earnings levels. To put this in perspective, consider two children who grow up to be 30 percentile points apart on the earnings distribution as adults, with one at the 80th percentile and the other at the 50th percentile. The child who grows up to be at the 80th percentile of the distribution as an adult will earn roughly twice as much compared with the child at the 50th percentile. 5

In addition to having lower earnings as adults, children born into lower-income families are more likely to experience outcomes that can negatively affect their success in the labor market later in life. Girls born into the bottom decile of the family income distribution are about 10 times more likely to become teenage mothers compared with those born to top-decile families. 6 Boys born into bottom-decile families are roughly 20 times more likely to be incarcerated in their thirties compared with boys from families in the top decile. 7 Teen pregnancy and incarceration are extreme examples of barriers to labor market success that differentially affect children from lower-income families. More generally, there are numerous reasons that any individual may struggle in the labor market, including skill mismatches and lack of proper training or education.

Does Meeting the Dual Mandate Facilitate Economic Mobility? Now, let me turn to the Fed's dual mandate and discuss how working toward maximum employment and price stability helps set the stage for broad-based success generally, and how this may provide favorable conditions for upward mobility.

Consider my first question: Does meeting the dual mandate facilitate economic mobility? To help answer this question, I want to revisit remarks I delivered earlier this year about the implications of noninflationary expansions on shared prosperity. 8 Specifically, I am reflecting on the economic expansion that followed the 2007–09 Global Financial Crisis (GFC). During that period, the economy expanded for 128 consecutive months, making it the longest economic expansion in U.S. history.

As shown in figure 2 , the aggregate unemployment rate fell steadily from a peak of 10 percent in October 2009 to 3.5 percent in September 2019, the lowest level recorded in nearly 50 years. The labor market in this period was remarkable in terms of broad-based gains seen across demographic groups, which contributed to a historic narrowing of employment differentials. To illustrate this point, let's add in unemployment rates by levels of education, as shown in figure 3 . In 2019, the unemployment rate gaps between workers with less than a high school education, the solid green line near the top of the chart, and those who had attained at least a bachelor's degree, the solid orange line closer to the bottom, were near multidecade lows. Further, the strong pre-pandemic labor market drew many new participants into the labor force, including teens and younger workers whose employment prospects, and even long-term career trajectories, are especially sensitive to the cyclical state of the economy. 9 These are the types of labor market conditions that the economist Arthur Okun speculated would increase upward mobility. 10 In a tight labor market, when individuals move up the job ladder, they create openings for newer or less educated workers.

Moving on to earnings, figure 4 shows that nominal wage growth increased steadily following the GFC. As with gains in employment, the strong labor market was especially beneficial for some groups. To demonstrate that, let's turn to figure 5 , which shows wage growth for different earnings levels. Wage growth for the bottom half of earners, the dashed red line, started to pick up about five years into the expansion, and by 2017, it was notably stronger compared with that for workers in the top half of the earnings distribution, the solid blue line. 11 These differences in wage growth are important. As the bottom of the distribution catches up to higher earners, wage inequality declines. These are also dynamics that can facilitate upward economic mobility.

Let me now turn to the second component of the dual mandate, price stability. While some long economic expansions have led to an unwelcome rise in prices, inflation remained low and stable during the economic expansion following the GFC. Indeed, Federal Reserve policymakers were grappling with inflation somewhat below, rather than above, the longer-run 2 percent target, as shown in figure 6 .

Low and stable inflation is important for individuals and businesses for a variety of reasons. It ensures that the nominal wage gains I just discussed are not eroded in real terms and that necessities remain affordable. In addition, it helps individuals and families plan for major purchases, such as a car or home, and for major expenses, including retirement and college.

I want to highlight one of these major expenses—higher education—as attending college is an important pathway for upward mobility. Looking at figure 7 , higher education inflation is shown by the red line. A variety of factors affect the cost of college generally, including student loan costs, state funding, and administrative overhead. Nonetheless, when inflation was low for an extended period during the economic expansion that followed the GFC, we also saw a moderation in the growth of higher education costs. 12

To illustrate the importance of college attendance for mobility, let me return to the rank–rank intergenerational mobility relationship I showed earlier. As before, the darkest dots show the national child-income-rank-to-parent-income-rank relationship. Now consider how this relationship looks across different types of higher education. The red line shows elite four-year colleges, the green line shows the remaining four-year institutions, and the lighter-blue line shows two-year schools. As you can see from the colored lines, the relationship between family income rank and later-life income rank is weaker—that is, the slope of the line is flatter—within each type of college than it is nationally.

The flatter slope indicates that outcomes for children from lower-income families are more similar to outcomes for children from higher-income families within each college type than they are overall. In this way, higher education is an important source of upward mobility for many youths and a pathway to a more secure financial future. Of course, the relatively steeper national relationship holds because there are meaningful differences in college enrollment over the family income distribution.

Going back to my initial question, I asked whether meeting the dual mandate facilitates economic mobility. I think that achieving the dual mandate sets the conditions for all individuals to succeed, including those moving up the economic ladder. The evidence suggests that long noninflationary expansions are associated with narrower gaps in employment and earnings, and that lower-wage and less-educated workers benefit disproportionately from sustained periods of strong economic growth. Further, achieving price stability allows individuals and households to plan for and make investments in human capital, such as attending college, that may allow individuals to move up the income distribution. 13

Does Economic Mobility Matter for the Conduct of Monetary Policy? Before I conclude, I want to return to my second question: Does economic mobility matter for the conduct of monetary policy? As I mentioned earlier, economic mobility is not part of the Federal Reserve's mandate, and our monetary policy tools are blunt instruments for affecting economic mobility. For example, interest rates affect the entire economy, not targeted populations, and rate changes operate through financial markets rather than directly influencing labor market outcomes.

One way that economic mobility could matter for the conduct of monetary policy is if the goals of monetary policy are easier to achieve in a high-mobility society compared with one with low mobility. I do not know if this is true, but let me offer some conjectures. I think that a society with relatively higher mobility may allow for more efficient transmission of monetary policy. In a dynamic economy with relatively more upward mobility, individuals may have greater incentives to be proactive in the job market. They may seek new and better job opportunities, which could allow for a quicker path to maximum employment following economic downturns. Further, individuals and households may hold additional savings for increased investments in human capital when mobility is relatively higher, allowing for more effective transmission of monetary policy. Stepping back, I pose this question not to offer a definitive answer, but rather to serve as one potential starting point for your discussions here today.

Conclusion Let me conclude by pointing out that the patterns we observe in our economy, including those for economic mobility, are not predetermined. Outcomes can and will change as we learn more about effective strategies to improve and maintain economic mobility in the U.S. By joining in these conversations here today, and by continuing to research and describe the patterns of economic mobility, you are helping society understand the dynamics of our economy better and find new and innovative ways to help keep the American dream of economic mobility alive and well. Thank you.

References Autor, David H. (2014). "Skills, Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality among the 'Other 99 Percent,' " Science, vol. 344 (May), pp. 843–51.

Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). " The Level and Distribution of Economic Well-Being ," speech delivered at the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce, Omaha, Neb., February 6.

Bleemer, Zachary, and Basit Zafar (2018). "Intended College Attendance: Evidence from an Experiment on College Returns and Costs," Journal of Public Economics, vol. 157 (January), pp. 184–211.

Card, David (1999). "Chapter 30 - The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings," in Orley C. Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3A. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, pp. 1801–63.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner, and Danny Yagan (2020). "Income Segregation and Intergenerational Mobility across Colleges in the United States," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 135 (August), pp. 1567–1633.

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez (2014). "Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 129 (November), pp. 1553–1623.

ISSP Research Group (2022). International Social Survey Programme: Social Inequality V - ISSP 2019 . GESIS, Cologne. ZA7600 Data file Version 3.0.0.

Jefferson, Philip N. (2025). " Do Non-inflationary Economic Expansions Promote Shared Prosperity? Evidence from the U.S. Labor Market ," speech delivered at Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pa., February 5.

Looney, Adam, and Nicholas Turner (2018). " Work and Opportunity before and after Incarceration (PDF) ," Economic Studies at Brookings. Washington: Brookings Institution, March.

Okun, Arthur M. (1973). " Upward Mobility in a High-Pressure Economy (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, pp. 207–61.

Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz (2012). "The Short- and Long-Term Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, vol. 4 (January), pp. 1–29.

Wolla, Scott A., Guillaume Vandenbroucke, and Cameron Tucker (2023). " Is College Still Worth the High Price? Weighing Costs and Benefits of Investing in Human Capital ," Page One Economics. St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, September 1.

Zimmerman, Seth D. (2014). "The Returns to College Admission for Academically Marginal Students," Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 32 (October), pp. 711–54.
April 22, 2025

Governor Adriana D. Kugler

At the Heller-Hurwicz Economics Institute, University of Minnesota,  Minneapolis, Minnesota

Thank you, Juan Pablo. I am delighted to be speaking at the University of Minnesota because, in many ways, this visit feels like a homecoming for me. 1 I was born right here in Minneapolis, before I moved to Colombia as a young child. My parents told me so many wonderful stories about this area and the university. My father studied for his Ph.D. here at the economics department. He studied under accomplished economists, including Anne Krueger, Leo Hurwicz, John Buttrick, and Ed Foster, the latter of whom is still here as an emeritus professor. The University of Minnesota has made many contributions to the field of economics and has historically had a close relationship with the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. So you really are part of the Fed's extended family, and it is an honor to speak with you.

Today, I would like to speak with you about the transmission of the Fed's monetary policy. I will discuss how monetary policy is transmitted through the economy, then touch on how I monitor its transmission, and, lastly, talk about two elements related to transmission that I evaluate when making monetary policy decisions. Those elements are the long and variable lags of monetary policy and whether its transmission is asymmetric and has changed over time. But before I delve into my primary topic, I would like to start by offering my views on the economic outlook.

Economic Outlook The U.S. economy has grown at a solid pace, with real gross domestic product (GDP) expanding 2.5 percent last year. Activity indicators in the first few months of this year show healthy numbers. Last week, the March retail sales release showed resilient consumption, with positive revisions for January and February numbers. However, measures of household sentiment, such as surveys from the University of Michigan, Conference Board, and Morning Consult, have shown signs of softness, albeit to varying degrees. Many survey respondents report that their views reflect trade policy concerns, though, as we have seen, the exact contours of those policies are still taking shape. Thus, GDP growth for the first quarter, which will be reported next week, may show some moderation relative to what we saw in 2024, although this moderation may be offset by increased purchases front-loading the implementation of tariffs. Financial markets have experienced increased volatility in recent weeks. If financial conditions were to tighten persistently, that could weigh on growth in the future.

The labor market remains solid, but the pace of hiring has eased during this year. In the first quarter, U.S. employers added 152,000 jobs per month, on average, compared with a monthly pace of 168,000, on average, last year. The unemployment rate edged up last month to 4.2 percent, but it is still low and has remained near its current level since last summer. Moreover, initial jobless claims have remained stable at low levels. Those numbers are consistent with other measures indicating that the labor market is broadly in balance.

With respect to inflation, progress has slowed since last summer, and inflation remains above the 2 percent goal. Based on the consumer price index (CPI) and producer price index (PPI) data, the 12-month change in the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index was estimated to have been 2.3 percent last month and 2.6 percent for the core categories, which exclude food and energy.

I pay careful attention to two subcategories of inflation: first, core goods—which are goods outside of volatile food and energy products—and, second, nonhousing market-based services, which are based on transactions and not imputed prices, such as car maintenance and haircuts. Goods inflation was negative in most of 2024—as was the norm for several years before the pandemic—but it increased to 0.4 percent in January and February. In March, the CPI and PPI releases pointed to goods inflation decreasing to a still-positive 0.1 percent, which is better news. By contrast, nonhousing market services inflation stayed elevated through March, at an estimated 3.4 percent. That category often provides a good signal of inflationary pressures across all services. As we look ahead, while the long-run level of tariffs is still to be determined, tariffs have moved significantly higher this year. That will likely put upward pressure on prices. For instance, both survey- and market-based measures of near-term inflation expectations have moved up. Longer-term inflation expectations—those beyond the next few years—largely remain well anchored and consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal, and I hope they continue in that way.

I am closely monitoring incoming data and the cumulative effects on both sides of our mandate from policies in four distinct areas: trade, immigration, fiscal policy, and regulation. I am also monitoring any risks to the outlook, especially upside risks on inflation or downside risks to employment. Still, I think our monetary policy is well positioned for changes in the macroeconomic environment. Thus, I will support maintaining the current policy rate for as long as these upside risks to inflation continue, while economic activity and employment remain stable. I remain committed to achieving both of our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices.

Overview of Monetary Policy Transmission Now turning to the primary topic of my speech, I will first discuss how monetary policy is transmitted through the economy. In this section, I will give some examples from the recent past as a tool for explaining my arguments, but I am not intending to comment further on the latest developments in the economy.

Understanding the transmission of monetary policy starts with understanding how the Federal Reserve uses its policy tools. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) adjusts the target range for the federal funds rate, or the rate that banks pay for overnight borrowing. Setting the federal funds rate is the primary means by which the Fed adjusts the stance of monetary policy, among its range of monetary policy tools. In addition to the FOMC directly adjusting the federal funds rate, Fed policymakers' communications about the future path of monetary policy may also result in changes to longer-term interest rates because households' and businesses' expectations about future policy affect the level of interest rates.

Adjustments to the federal funds rate affect a multitude of financial conditions faced by consumers and businesses. For example, changes to the federal funds rate filter through to the interest rates lenders charge for loans to businesses and households as well as to what financial institutions pay in interest on deposits. The current and expected future path of the federal funds rate also affects asset prices, as it changes the relative attractiveness of different investments, such as stocks and real estate. Fluctuations in both interest rates and asset prices affect a household's wealth and a corporation's balance sheet, which can, in turn, affect the terms under which they can borrow. 2 I have discussed some of the most common ways in which policy is transmitted. There are, of course, other important channels, such as exchange rates and international spillovers, that I will not discuss today. Research suggests that the channels of transmission are extensive and ever evolving. 3

Consumers and businesses make decisions based on financial conditions. 4 For illustrative purposes, let's consider a period when FOMC policymakers view it as appropriate to ease the restrictiveness of monetary policy by reducing the target range for the federal funds rate over time. The resulting lower interest rates on consumer loans elicit greater spending on goods and services, particularly on durable goods that are often financed. Lower mortgage rates can encourage renters to buy a home by reducing the monthly payment borrowers face and can encourage existing homeowners to refinance their mortgages to free up cash for other purchases. Lower interest rates can make holding equities more attractive, which raises stock prices and adds to wealth. Higher wealth tends to spur more spending, as households tend to consume at least a portion of their increased wealth. Investment projects that businesses previously believed would be marginally unprofitable become attractive because of reduced financing costs, particularly if businesses expect their sales to rise. Expecting a better macroeconomic environment and lower delinquency rates down the road, banks may loosen their lending standards on approving loans for households and businesses. All these decisions support aggregate demand and may put upward pressure on inflation.

Of course, there are periods when policymakers see it as appropriate to increase the level of restraint placed on the economy by raising the federal funds rate over time. That may occur when policymakers are seeking to lower inflation. Then, the monetary policy effects I just described would be reversed, putting downward pressure on aggregate demand and inflation.

Developments in Monetary Policy and Financial Conditions Let me now discuss how I view the transmission and the stance of monetary policy during the past few quarters. To be clear, I will not discuss the developments in financial markets over the past few weeks.

In the second half of last year, I gained greater confidence that inflation was on a sustainable path toward the FOMC's 2 percent objective. I also wanted to preserve the strength I saw in the labor market. As a result, I supported the FOMC's decision to decrease the target range for the federal funds rate by a total of 1 percentage point during the meetings from September through December. However, even before the Committee began to ease policy, some financial conditions started to ease. This easing can be seen in the Financial Conditions Impulse on Growth index. 5 That index, developed by Federal Reserve Board staff, showed easier financial conditions from March 2024. And through January, the demand for loans by households and businesses picked up. 6 In the early months of the year, financial conditions, however, remained somewhat restrictive, as borrowing costs continued to be elevated and bank credit moderately tight. Through March, interest rates on short-term small business loans had only edged down since their post-pandemic peak. 7 Banks stopped tightening lending standards after nine consecutive quarters, but they left standards unchanged in January. 8 These financial conditions helped to moderate aggregate demand and aid in moving inflation sustainably toward our 2 percent target.

Details of Monetary Policy Transmission Monitoring the financial conditions I just described is one important way I evaluate how well the Fed's monetary policy is being transmitted to the rest of the economy. But it is not the only way. I also consider two other elements that play important roles in the transmission of our monetary policy.

Timing Matters The first element to evaluate is the timing with which monetary policy affects the macroeconomy. The contemporary economics literature uses a variety of statistical models to estimate the effects of what are called monetary policy "shocks." Those are movements in the policy rate that are not explained by estimates of how monetary policy systematically responds to incoming economic and financial data and are not anticipated by the public. 9 Focusing on the estimated effects of these shocks helps isolate the consequences solely coming from monetary policy actions and communications. One lesson that emerges from this research is that, broadly speaking, it turns out that Milton Friedman's "long and variable lags" concept still holds. 10 A selection of key studies on the topic estimates that it takes about one to two years for the maximum effects of policy to be observed in economic activity and inflation. 11 These long lags in monetary policy affecting the economy point to why it is important for policymakers to anticipate economic conditions as best as possible and try to be proactive about understanding the effects of different shocks to the economy, so they can act quickly when needed.

Direction of Travel The second element to consider when making decisions related to monetary policy is whether its transmission has been equally impactful during different points in time. For example, credible evidence indicates that contractionary monetary shocks may generally decrease economic activity more strongly than expansionary shocks increase it. 12 To understand these asymmetric effects, consider the following illustrative metaphor used by Marriner Eccles, who led the Fed back in the 1930s.

Imagine a string with monetary policy at one end and the economy at the other. Employing tight monetary policy when inflation is rising is like pulling on the string to keep the economy in check—it works fairly well. But attempting to stimulate the economy with loose policy during a downturn is like trying to push on the string to move the economy—a more difficult task.

There is evidence of this asymmetry in consumer spending on long-lasting durable goods, such as vehicles and appliances. While an easier monetary policy may lower interest rates and thus stimulate spending on durable goods in the near term, the effects of that policy may be smaller over time, as households may have already purchased durable goods. 13 If a family replaces their living room furniture when rates are low, they are unlikely to need a new set of furniture a few years later and thus would not consider how current rates would change their decisions. Thus, during an easing cycle, it is reasonable to suspect that the potency of monetary policy may be somewhat diminished.

Another example of asymmetry can be seen in the transmission of monetary policy to private lending. Board staff research documented strong growth in the period between the Global Financial Crisis and the pandemic, fueled by structural factors, such as the attractiveness of the market to borrowers and investors due to its higher customization. 14 One implication of this strong growth during this past policy tightening is that monetary policy transmission to private credit markets appeared more muted relative to financing through public credit markets or bank commercial and industrial lending.

By contrast, other factors specific to the recent period likely decreased the potency of monetary policy during the tightening cycle but may increase it during the easing cycle. When the pandemic struck and social distancing was common, many households severely curtailed spending. In addition, a historic level of government transfers boosted household income. This combination led the personal savings rate to soar. 15 Recent work by Board staff suggests that these excess savings accumulated during the pandemic may have reduced the effects of tighter monetary policy over recent years. 16 If households are flush with excess cash, they are less likely to respond to elevated interest rates by curtailing demand. Instead, they may have funds to avoid financing or may feel they are able to afford higher monthly payments.

Now, some five years after the pandemic began, these excess savings are exhausted. 17 This creates an environment in which monetary policy could be having its average effects on the household sector, although we should consider that the financial health of borrowers with lower credit scores has deteriorated meaningfully in recent years and credit card and auto loan delinquencies are now above pre-pandemic levels. For these households, easing monetary policy may have larger effects.

I am closely monitoring all these possible changes in monetary policy transmission across the economy. Also, I am humbly aware that it is difficult for economists to judge the overall effect of monetary policy actions on the U.S. economy in real time.

Conclusion To summarize, I see inflation still running above the 2 percent target while the labor market has remained stable. But the economy is facing heightened uncertainty, with upside risks to inflation and downside risks to employment. This month, we learned that the tariff increases are significantly larger than previously expected. As a result, the economic effects of tariffs and the associated uncertainty are also likely to be larger than anticipated. It is important for monetary policymakers to broadly examine all available information, including market-based measures, surveys, and anecdotal reports, to understand what is happening in the economy as early as possible because, as I discussed, it takes time for policy to have an impact. As the direction of the economy changes, it is critical to pay close attention to real-time data and to consider the lags and asymmetries of policy transmission to ensure we respond not only to the actual movements on both sides of the mandate, but also to the risks to the economic outlook.

As I observe the economy and consider the appropriate path of monetary policy, I am closely studying how the decisions the FOMC makes are transmitted through the economy. We have learned much about how those transmission channels work and how they may have changed in recent years, and there is much more to learn. I am confident some of that research will be done right here at the University of Minnesota. Overall, of course, when setting policy, I am guided by how best to achieve the dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices given to us by Congress because that results in the best outcomes for all Americans.

Thank you again for such a warm welcome back to the Twin Cities.
