March 07, 2025

Chair Jerome H. Powell

At the University of Chicago Booth School of Business 2025 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York

Thank you, Anil. I appreciate the opportunity to speak at this forum and look forward to our discussion. I will start with some brief remarks about the economy and the path of policy.

Despite elevated levels of uncertainty, the U.S. economy continues to be in a good place. The labor market is solid, and inflation has moved closer to our 2 percent longer-run goal. At the Federal Reserve, we are intently focused on the dual-mandate goals given to us by Congress: maximum employment and stable prices.

Recent Economic Data Economic growth The economy has been growing at a solid pace. GDP expanded at a 2.3 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of last year, extending a period of consistent growth that has been supported by resilient consumer spending. Recent indicators point to a possible moderation in consumer spending relative to the rapid growth rate over the second half of 2024. Further, recent surveys of households and businesses point to heightened uncertainty about the economic outlook. It remains to be seen how these developments might affect future spending and investment. Sentiment readings have not been a good predictor of consumption growth in recent years. We continue to carefully monitor a variety of indicators of household and business spending.

The labor market Many indicators show that the labor market is solid and broadly in balance. The jobs report released this morning showed employers added 151,000 jobs to payrolls in February and the unemployment rate was 4.1 percent last month. Smoothing over the month-to-month volatility, since September, employers have added a solid 191,000 jobs a month on average. The unemployment rate remains low and has held in a narrow range between 3.9 and 4.2 percent for the past year. The jobs-to-workers gap has narrowed, and the quits rate has moved below pre-pandemic levels. Wages are growing faster than inflation, and at a more sustainable pace than earlier in the pandemic recovery. With wage growth moderating and labor supply and demand having moved into better balance, the labor market is not a significant source of inflationary pressure.

Inflation Inflation has come down a long way from its mid-2022 peak above 7 percent without a sharp increase in unemployment—a historically unusual and most welcome outcome. While progress in reducing inflation has been broad based, recent readings remain somewhat above our 2 percent objective. The path to sustainably returning inflation to our target has been bumpy, and we expect that to continue. We see ongoing progress in categories that remain elevated, such as housing services and the market-based components of non-housing services. Inflation can be volatile month-to-month, and we do not overreact to one or two readings that are higher or lower than anticipated. Data released last week showed that total PCE prices rose 2.5 percent over the 12 months ending in January and that, excluding the volatile food and energy categories, core PCE prices rose 2.6 percent. We pay close attention to a broad range of measures of inflation expectations, and some near-term measures have recently moved up. We see this in both market- and survey-based measures, and survey respondents, both consumers and businesses, are mentioning tariffs as a driving factor. Beyond the next year or so, however, most measures of longer-term expectations remain stable and consistent with our 2 percent inflation goal.

Monetary Policy Looking ahead, the new Administration is in the process of implementing significant policy changes in four distinct areas: trade, immigration, fiscal policy, and regulation. It is the net effect of these policy changes that will matter for the economy and for the path of monetary policy. While there have been recent developments in some of these areas, especially trade policy, uncertainty around the changes and their likely effects remains high. As we parse the incoming information, we are focused on separating the signal from the noise as the outlook evolves. We do not need to be in a hurry, and are well positioned to wait for greater clarity.

Policy is not on a preset course. If the economy remains strong but inflation does not continue to move sustainably toward 2 percent, we can maintain policy restraint for longer. If the labor market were to weaken unexpectedly or inflation were to fall more quickly than anticipated, we can ease policy accordingly. Our current policy stance is well positioned to deal with the risks and uncertainties that we face in pursuing both sides of our dual mandate.

Conclusion Before I conclude, I will note that at our last FOMC meeting, we began our second five-year review of our monetary policy framework. We will consider changes to our consensus statement (Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy) and to our communications as part of this review. The consensus statement articulates our framework for the conduct of monetary policy in pursuit of the goals assigned to us by Congress. We will consider lessons of the past five years and adapt our approach, where appropriate, to best serve the American people, to whom we are accountable. The 2 percent longer-run inflation goal will be retained and is not a focus of the review.

This public review will be familiar to those who followed our process five years ago. We will hold outreach events around the country involving a wide range of parties, including Fed Listens events. We are open to new ideas and critical feedback. We will host a research conference in Washington in May. Our intent is to wrap up the review by late summer.

Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
March 07, 2025

Governor Michelle W. Bowman

At the 2025 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York

Thank you for the invitation to participate at this year's U.S. Monetary Policy Forum conference. It is a pleasure to be here to discuss the conference report and present my views on the transmission of monetary policy to real activity in recent years. 1 I would like to start by thanking the authors of the paper for their thoughtful and comprehensive analysis of the effects of monetary policy on economic activity. As you all may know, my background is in banking and bank regulation, so my experience with and interest in understanding the transmission and effects of monetary policy stems from my responsibilities as a Member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).

Turning to the discussion, I will begin with a few comments and suggestions on the paper and then focus on how monetary policy and other factors influenced U.S. economic performance during the tightening cycle that started in March 2022. I will then conclude with some thoughts on the relevance of the results in the paper for monetary policy going forward.

Comments and Suggestions on "Monetary Policy Transmission to Real Activity" The paper's stated purpose is to estimate how monetary policy shocks affect gross domestic product (GDP) and employment through the use of a range of models. The evidence is generally similar to previous studies, supporting the broader principle that monetary policy exerts its effects with long lags and has a limited contribution to changes in real activity when the shock is small and not very persistent. We should keep in mind, however, that many other shocks hit the economy and that at times it may be hard to see the effects of monetary policy actions estimated in the paper as they work through the actual economy.

The paper notes that a 1 percentage point increase in the federal funds rate that retraces gradually, taking five to six quarters to reach half of its initial size, has persistent negative effects on GDP and employment. At maximum, this shock lowers GDP by 0.4 percent in about 18 months and employment by 0.3 percent in about two years, on average across the models considered in the paper. However, there is a wide range of estimated responses, as they depend on each model specification and the data used. The most sensitive components of GDP are residential investment, business fixed investment, and durable goods consumption, which is consistent with employment in the construction and durable goods manufacturing industries being highly interest-rate sensitive.

The paper analyzes the transmission of monetary policy to real activity, but it would have been very interesting to go one step further and also see the effects of monetary policy on inflation. This is especially relevant because the FOMC has been focused on bringing inflation down to its 2 percent target over the past few years. Of course, higher interest rates lower inflation by dampening aggregate demand and real activity, thereby removing pressure on resource utilization, wages, and prices.

The authors use several models to analyze the transmission of monetary policy. They use two well-known structural models created by Federal Reserve Board staff that have been used in Tealbook, the FRB/US and EDO models, in addition to two reduced-form VAR models, the New York Fed Bayesian VAR model and a simple four-variable proxy VAR model. It is reassuring that the estimated responses to a federal funds rate shock in the two models that I am most familiar with, the Board FRB/US and EDO models, seem consistent with previous findings. 2

One small issue is that neither of the VAR models directly includes the federal funds rate. The authors acknowledge this limitation in the analysis and address it by roughly estimating that a 100-basis points shock to the policy rate boosts the 1-year and 2‑year Treasury yields by 45 and 40 basis points, respectively. This approach may have resulted in the implied monetary policy shock in the two VAR models looking more persistent than in the two structural models. I would suggest the authors take another look at this aspect of their exercise, so that the contours of the monetary policy shocks look more similar across the different models.

An alternative approach would have been to take the 1- and 2-year averages of the federal funds rate from the FRB/US and EDO impulse responses and possibly add a small term premium. This approach would have suggested larger effects of the federal funds rate shock on the 1- and 2-year Treasury yields than estimated by the authors. Another approach, especially in the proxy VAR setting, would have been to use a measure of the shadow federal funds rate, which provides a gauge of the overall monetary policy stance and is not constrained by the zero lower bound. 3

The paper focused on the effect of changes in the policy rate, but an important channel for the transmission of monetary policy is how it affects private interest rates that are relevant for households and businesses consumption and investment decisions. Private rates include interest rates charged on outstanding credit card balances, rates on auto and other durable goods loans, mortgage rates, and corporate bond yields. Although credit card rates move closely in line with the policy rate and include a time-varying spread that depends on the default risk profile of the borrower, longer-term private fixed rates on mortgages and corporate bonds depend on the expected path of the federal funds rate, the term premium embedded in longer-term Treasury yields, and risk spreads relative to Treasury securities of comparable maturity. Accordingly, monetary policy tools other than the policy rate, including forward guidance and the amount of securities holdings in the central bank's balance sheet, are also important for the transmission of monetary policy since they can more forcefully affect the expected path of the federal funds rate, term premiums, and risk spreads.

The authors analyze the contribution of major aggregate demand components to the overall effect of a monetary policy shock on GDP. One minor issue is that not all the models treat business investment equally. In particular, the EDO model includes inventory investment under business investment, while all other models do not appear to do so. This difference may contribute to the much larger initial reaction of business investment in the EDO model compared to the other models, as inventory investment reacts quickly to a shock in the federal funds rate.

I would like to offer one last comment on the relatively small effect of monetary policy on real activity. Although I do not disagree with the authors' assessment, I think that the estimated effects can cumulate to be quite sizable even for the transient unexpected shock considered. The FOMC quickly raised interest rates to fight surging inflation between March 2022 and July 2023 by a cumulative 5-1/4 percentage points. According to the average impulse responses, a shock of this magnitude would lead to declines of about 2 percent on the level of real GDP and 1.5 percent on the level of employment, which would translate into a similarly large increase in the unemployment rate if those who lost their jobs mostly remained in the labor force. This seems to suggest the potential for fairly large effects on real activity, especially when the monetary policy shock has more persistent effects on the policy rate and results in larger increases in term premiums and risk spreads.

The Recent Tightening Cycle The FOMC started raising the federal funds rate in March 2022 to combat rising inflation. Although the initial rate hike was a mere 1/4 percentage point, the pace of tightening was faster over the remainder of the year, with an overall increase of more than 4 percentage points in the policy rate by the end of 2022. Rate hikes continued in smaller 1/4 percentage point steps the following year, adding to 1 additional percentage point increase by July 2023. As the authors note in the paper, the rapid pace of monetary policy tightening was somewhat surprising, especially as the FOMC was initially slow to react to signs that the rise in inflation during 2021 was not merely transitory and required more aggressive action.

As financial conditions tightened rapidly and the yield curve inverted in 2022, fears of an impending recession started to rise, with Federal Reserve Board staff mentioning downside risks to real activity and that a mild recession seemed equally likely to the baseline Tealbook projection for sluggish economic growth over the next year. 4 The staff eventually predicted a mild recession in the Tealbook forecast after the bank failures and banking system stress in the spring of 2023. 5 Such recession was widely predicted and, in hindsight, it never materialized. As you well know, the yield curve inversion has not been the only predictor of recessions that has failed in recent years.

On a Q4-over-Q4 basis, GDP growth slowed considerably in 2022 to a modest pace of only 1.3 percent. The components of GDP that exerted the most drag on growth that year were residential investment, goods consumption, and inventory investment, subtracting a total of 1‑1/2 percentage points from real GDP growth in 2022.

Residential investment weakened rather quickly and fell more than 16 percent in 2022. The sharp decline in this category seems largely explained by higher mortgage rates, which surged more than 3 percentage points over the course of the year as the FOMC aggressively tightened monetary policy. In addition to higher interest rates, the 1-1/2 percent drop in goods consumption in 2022 likely reflected the imprint of higher inflation on real disposable income and the unwinding of previous fiscal stimulus.

Somewhat at odds with the empirical results in the paper, business fixed investment continued to rise appreciably as special factors led to a delayed response to the rise in interest rates. A broader measure of business investment that includes inventories did show a slowdown in growth, but even this broad measure continued to rise appreciably in 2022. Business fixed investment was likely supported by construction of new microchip and battery plants, the continued boost to software investment following the switch to remote work, and a rebound in nonresidential structures and transportation equipment investment after their protracted decline over the pandemic.

Payroll employment increased strongly in 2022 as labor force participation rose, the unemployment rate declined, and the labor market tightened considerably. Payroll employment moved back up to its pre-pandemic level and approached its trend as social distancing receded. The recovery dynamics in employment largely masked any effects from rising interest rates in 2022. The effect from higher interest rates on employment also tends to lag and be more persistent than the effect on GDP, so any effects likely showed up in 2023, an outcome that is consistent with the findings in the paper.

Some Reasons Why the Economy Outperformed The economy outperformed in 2023 as widespread predictions of an impending recession never materialized and instead growth picked up. From the point of view of the models in the paper, the stronger economy in 2023 also seems surprising, but this likely reflected other factors that influenced the economy and that are not accounted for in the model simulations.

Despite significant tightening in broad financial conditions in 2023, GDP growth strengthened notably as fiscal policy turned from a drag into a meaningful boost to growth and potential output accelerated further due to increased immigration and strong productivity growth. These favorable supply developments allowed for stronger economic activity along with easing of inflationary pressures. Although growth surprised to the upside in 2023, labor market tightness eased with the unemployment rate edging up over the year and payroll employment growth slowing markedly.

Faster GDP growth in 2023 was driven by a rebound in goods consumption, some recovery in residential investment, and stronger government spending. Goods consumption was boosted by strong gains in real compensation and personal income, including from declining inflation. Despite continued drag from higher mortgage rates, residential investment started recovering in 2023 as other factors supported demand. In particular, the labor market remained strong and household balance sheets were still healthy. The sharp rise in mortgage rates also created a lock‑in effect that increased demand for new housing and construction activity.

The marked deceleration in employment in 2023 seems consistent with the longer lags in the response of employment to the rise in interest rates relative to that of GDP, especially as a significant portion of employment gains reflected increased labor supply from immigration, which allowed the labor market to come into better balance. Also consistent with the paper results, employment gains in the construction and durable goods manufacturing industries were more noticeably below their 2015-2019 trends than employment gains for the aggregate economy.

As the authors argue, another reason why real activity was more resilient in the face of higher interest rates may have been the healthy balance sheets of households and businesses at the start of the tightening cycle. Households had accumulated excess savings during the pandemic, reflecting both increased fiscal stimulus and reduced consumption due to social distancing and supply bottlenecks. 6 In fact, data from the Financial Accounts of the U.S. indicate that in the two years between the end of 2019 and the end of 2021, household bank deposits rose by nearly $4 trillion. 7

In addition, many households and nonfinancial businesses were able to refinance their mortgages and corporate bonds at very low rates during the pandemic. Although higher interest rates likely held back additional consumption expenditures and investment spending, they had less of an effect on households' and nonfinancial businesses' net cash flows as the average interest rates on household mortgages and business debt remained low. 8

With historically low borrowing costs during the pandemic era, mortgage originations and refinancing activity reached very high levels. As a result, the share of outstanding mortgages with an interest rate below 4 percent increased to nearly 70 percent by 2022 and it remains well above pre-pandemic levels today. Similarly, nonfinancial businesses issued record amounts of corporate bonds and extended the maturity of their debt to avoid new debt issuance earlier in the subsequent rate hiking cycle. Between 2020 and 2021, the fraction of triple-B corporate bonds maturing within three years fell to its lowest levels in nearly 20 years.

Fiscal policy also reentered expansionary territory in 2023, with above-trend stimulus partly driven by strong state and local government spending. Although the unwinding of COVID-19 fiscal support continued in 2023, the federal budget deficit turned back up and rose to near 6 percent of GDP, while the primary deficit inched up towards 4 percent of GDP. These deficit levels are unusual for an expansion, especially as fiscal policy seems to have contributed to the degree of tightness in the economy.

One way to describe the resiliency of real activity to higher interest rates during the recent tightening cycle is to say that some of the previously noted factors led to a rise in r-star. Higher population growth, from the influx of new immigrants, and higher productivity growth, arguably from the use of new technologies like artificial intelligence and the surge in new business formations, especially in high-tech industries, have likely boosted investment demand. In addition, the lack of significant fiscal consolidation has also increased demand for savings. An economy with stronger investment demand and very little household savings likely requires a higher equilibrium interest rate relative to pre-pandemic norms.

Relevance of Results for Monetary Policy Going Forward The U.S. economy has been experiencing major shocks and structural changes since the pandemic, which may have influenced or masked the transmission of monetary policy to real activity. It is, therefore, not straightforward to see how the impulse responses shown in this paper have translated in practice. And, as the paper acknowledges, a large portion of the fluctuations in real activity are driven by shocks other than those to monetary policy. Although the FOMC has been focused on lowering inflation in the past few years, as we continue to make progress on approaching our 2 percent target, I expect that the labor market and economic activity will become a larger factor in the FOMC's policy discussions. Accordingly, the stylized results on real activity effects in the paper will prove especially useful going forward.

Conclusion I will conclude by saying that I enjoyed the paper, and that I appreciate the opportunity to be here to share my views on this topic. I look forward to the discussion and to hearing feedback from other participants and the perspective of my FOMC colleague and fellow discussant.
March 07, 2025

Governor Adriana D. Kugler

At the Conference on Monetary Policy Transmission and the Labor Market, Banco de Portugal, Lisbon, Portugal

Thank you, Tiago, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. I am delighted to be at the Bank of Portugal, among friends, including Governor Centeno, and to be speaking at a conference focusing on matters I deeply care about—monetary policy and labor markets. 1 Before I became a monetary policymaker, a large share of my work as an academic researcher addressed the effect on labor markets from policy choices such as payroll taxation, employment protections, occupational licensing, and unemployment insurance (UI). I was able to apply some of these insights in my work as the chief economist at the Department of Labor, analyzing the labor market and supporting research on policies and their effectiveness.

And, of course, labor markets are central to carrying out the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices. Recently, labor supply and demand in the United States have been roughly in balance, and the unemployment rate has been running close to the estimates of FOMC participants for its longer-run rate, which is consistent with the Committee's maximum-employment goal.

Today's employment report for February corroborates this view. The net number of new jobs created was 151,000, not too far from the 177,000 average of the previous six months. The unemployment rate was 4.1 percent, still in the narrow range between 4 percent and 4.2 percent that it has remained in since last summer. Labor force participation was 62.4 percent—likewise within the range of values observed in the past year. Consistent with this stability and evidence of balanced labor supply and demand, average hourly earnings are up 4 percent in the past 12 months, and with strong productivity growth in recent quarters, I do not believe wages are a significant source of inflation pressure.

On the price side of the FOMC's dual mandate, inflation has fallen significantly since its peak in mid-2022, and we have lowered our policy rate accordingly, with a reduction of 100 basis points since last September. Still, inflation has moved sideways since the second half of last year, with uneven progress across its major categories. Inflation for market-based core services excluding housing has stepped down to an estimated 2.4 percent in January from a level of about 3.5 percent in the first quarter of 2024. Housing inflation, which has stubbornly hovered above 5 percent for most of last year, has finally come down to an estimated 4.5 percent in January. Adding to that, measures of new rents, such as those published by CoreLogic, suggest further progress in housing inflation going forward.

Unfortunately, one category of prices that has put upward pressure on inflation is "non-market-based" core services, which are imputed rather than observed. Although some of the components in that category may be affected by difficulties in measurement, others, such as prices for some financial services, are tied to the stock market and may have been signaling wealth effects that helped push up aggregate demand. Core goods inflation has also been slowly rising. In the first half of 2024, core goods inflation was negative 0.6 percent on average, close to its pre-COVID rate. But, starting in May, core goods inflation has stepped up, and it was estimated to be about 0.3 percent in January. Consistent with an increase in goods prices, the releases of manufacturing and nonmanufacturing surveys this week, including those by the Institute for Supply Management, showed a jump in prices paid for purchases inputs. This rise is not a welcome development because, over the long term, goods price deflation has offset price increases in other categories and kept a lid on overall inflation.

Notwithstanding the well-balanced labor market, there are important upside risks to inflation. Some measures of inflation expectations have risen significantly in the past couple of months, including those from the Michigan survey, the Conference Board, and the Atlanta Fed's survey of businesses. For example, the measure of inflation expectations 1 year in the future from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers rose from 3.3 percent in December to 4.3 percent in January, while the expectations in the next 5 to 10 years rose over the same period—from 3.2 percent to 3.5 percent. There is also considerable uncertainty about the inflationary effects of new policies and policy proposals. With all these factors in mind, I strongly supported the FOMC's decision at our January meeting to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 4-1/4 to 4-1/2 percent. Given the recent increase in inflation expectations and the key inflation categories that have not shown progress toward our 2 percent target, it could be appropriate to continue holding the policy rate at its current level for some time. Going forward, I will continue to closely monitor the effects of policies on the economy, and I will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and any changes in the balance of risks.

Let me now take a step back. To understand the recent experience of a resilient and balanced U.S. labor market, it is helpful to look outward and consider how labor markets behaved around the world after the advent of the COVID-19 pandemic and its significant effects on employment. In the remainder of my remarks, I will discuss similarities and differences in labor market recoveries in different countries, with a special emphasis on the possible factors that helped the United States achieve a rebalancing of its labor market and rapid disinflation, and I will also address the potential for changes in these trends moving forward.

The worldwide pandemic disrupted the global economy and immediately caused high levels of unemployment and other forms of slackness in labor markets. While the timing and extent of job losses and recovery from the pandemic varied widely across advanced and emerging economies, there were some commonalities. By the spring of 2021, lower-skilled and younger workers had been hit harder than other groups, with larger increases in unemployment rates and larger declines in labor force participation. 2 Across different countries, there was also considerable variation in labor market policies enacted in response to the pandemic disruptions. For example, while the United States pursued, among other initiatives, its usual approach of extended unemployment benefits to displaced workers, supplemented with unprecedented extra benefits to individuals, Australia and several European countries used short-term subsidies to employers to keep workers in their jobs. After accounting for these policy variations, which were, in some cases, rooted in longstanding differences in how different governments try to stabilize employment, academic research has also found significant variation in the reasons why people were not working during the acute phase of the pandemic. 3 For instance, researchers found that, in the United States, a greater share of the unemployed had lost their jobs recently, while in Europe and Australia, it was more common for people to be absent from work; in South Korea, a larger share of those not working had dropped out of the labor force.

The decrease in labor supply around the world also affected different types of workers in different countries. Net immigration fell in North America and Europe. In the United States and the United Kingdom, people retired at greater rates than had been experienced before the pandemic. 4 In the U.S., many workers caring for elderly or ill relatives or children out of school left their jobs and the labor force or curtailed the number of hours they worked. 5 In one study that looked at the United States, Canada, and four European countries, the declines in employment and hours worked were particularly large among women, with this gender gap being at least partially explained by childcare needs. 6 While this difference between men and women was significant in the United States for both employment and hours, in other countries, such as Germany, it only generated a gender gap in hours worked, probably because Germany's policies were aimed at keeping workers in their jobs and minimizing dislocation. Across the world, the number of younger workers neither in school nor in the labor force also rose, with larger increases in North America relative to Western Europe—for example, the 3.5 percentage point increase in the United States from 2019 to 2020 compared with the 1.1 percentage point rise in Portugal during the same period. 7 While there were larger declines in the number of people working in the U.S., there was a larger decrease in labor supply in the euro area relative to the United States because of the substantial decline in total hours worked in Europe, which was at least partially due to retention and work-sharing programs during the pandemic.

As restrictions to contain the spread of COVID-19 were eased and economies reopened, there were large imbalances between labor supply and demand. With a surprisingly rapid recovery in economic activity in most countries, labor demand surged, but labor supply continued to be hampered by many lingering factors, including illness, voluntary social distancing, early retirements, and still-low levels of net immigration. 8 As economies reopened, the imbalance between supply and demand was amplified by consumers, who had been prevented from spending on many in-person services, abruptly switching their spending from goods to services. 9 This substitution induced a large increase in the demand for workers in the services sector, leading to acute labor shortages in some industries. The labor shortage throughout the economy was reflected in low employment-to-population ratios and labor force participation rates (LFPRs) for many advanced economies. Tighter labor markets lowered unemployment rates and boosted wage growth in many economies in the second half of 2020, and, by the end of 2021, vacancy and quits rates were high. 10 While this tightness in labor markets was in evidence on both sides of the Atlantic, it was more acute in the United States, where we saw the vacancies-to-unemployment (V/U) ratio reach a historical peak of 2 in early 2022, two-thirds higher than its 2019 level. In the euro area, where the V/U ratio has traditionally been lower, Federal Reserve staff estimate that it also reached a historical high of 0.45 in the second quarter of 2022, more than 50 percent higher than its 2019 level.

To understand the cross-country differences in the rebalancing from tight to looser labor markets, I want to highlight three important factors that contributed to the cross-country performance of labor markets over the past few years: first, the increases in LFPRs, especially for prime-age workers; second, increased labor productivity; and third, an increase in net immigration and also the absorption of these immigrants into labor markets.

Let's start with LFPRs. In the United States, after participation by prime-age workers fell early in the pandemic, its recovery was quite strong until last year, and it reached levels not seen since the late 1990s. A notable contributor to this recovery was the LFPR of prime-age women, which reached historical highs last year, likely due to additional help in childcare responsibilities from other family members and flexible work arrangements. 11 While prime-age worker participation recovered, the LFPR for all workers has remained stubbornly below its pre-pandemic level in the U.S. and other advanced economies. In the case of the United States, unusually high rates of retirement during the 2021–22 period played an important role, a phenomenon driven by, among other factors, increases in wealth fueled by gains in the stock market and rising home prices. 12 Of course, another factor driving the drag in U.S. participation has been the aging of the population and the expected ongoing retirement of baby boomers.

By contrast, the euro area saw the LFPRs surpass their pre-pandemic levels by early 2022, as policies in these countries promoted job retention. Moreover, because far fewer Europeans continue working after the age of 65, the participation rate of older workers did not fall as much during the pandemic.

Differences in labor market policies likely contributed to the different recovery paths of the LFPR across advanced economies. In the United States, estimates show that unemployed workers leave the labor force at a rate about 10 times higher than that of employed workers. 13 After leaving the labor force, a typical worker remains there for a significant period and may never again look for work. Thus, one might expect that labor market policies that have different effects on the severity of spikes in unemployment would also affect labor force participation differently. 14 As many European countries that faced lower increases in unemployment also faced lower decreases in the LFPR, it seems that unemployment spells during the COVID-driven downturn might have contributed to exits from the labor force. So, to the extent that the emphasis on job retention in Europe helped limit such exits, this policy choice may have helped explain the higher rates of labor force participation in the euro area relative to the United States.

The second factor I want to highlight that boosted labor supply during the economic recovery from the pandemic is productivity growth, which in a way acts like an increase in labor supply, as it increases the output that each worker can produce. It seems likely that U.S. labor market policies spurred the higher rates of productivity growth in the United States relative to the euro area.

On the one hand, worker retention policies in Europe preserved the human capital of those specific firm–worker relationships. These relationships are quite valuable when job-finding rates are low, and workers may spend longer times being unemployed. 15 Indeed, euro-area businesses have been reluctant to let go of workers, and indicators of labor hoarding are higher than their pre-pandemic levels. 16 One consequence of this hoarding is that hours per worker remain below pre-pandemic levels, pointing to a lower output per worker.

On the other hand, in economies such as the United States that have relatively higher job-finding rates, UI promotes the flow of workers to more-productive sectors of the economy and results in less labor hoarding. Research by Federal Reserve staff shows more sectoral reallocation of workers in the United States compared with the euro area. 17 As I argued in a speech in October at the European Central Bank, this pattern is very likely a major reason why productivity growth has been higher in the United States relative to other advanced economies. 18

U.S. labor market policies that rely more heavily on UI may have contributed to higher productivity growth in the United States, and to our recovery from the effects of the pandemic, by better matching the skills of individuals with jobs that make the best use of those skills. Research finds that longer durations of UI allow workers to search for longer and find better job matches, even within the same industry. That is the conclusion of research that I conducted with academic colleagues before I joined the Federal Reserve Board, and it can also be applied to the pandemic period because of the extended UI that individuals received during the period. 19 These larger benefits may have improved the efficiency of the U.S. labor market by also freeing up jobs that UI recipients would have taken but that would not have been as good a fit for them. These openings may have allowed other UI nonrecipients to also match up with better employers given their qualifications and may have improved labor market efficiency. Consistent with this idea, U.S. workers switched jobs at higher rates than in past recoveries, as reflected in higher quits rates. It seems very likely that the emphasis on UI in the United States, relative to its European peers, in the recent downturn contributed to higher productivity rates through better job matching.

The third important factor boosting labor supply since the pandemic was increased immigration in a number of countries. While immigration flows into some European countries were comparable in proportion to those into the United States in 2022 and 2023, new immigrants often integrate more quickly into the labor force in the U.S., relative to European countries, possibly because of the higher flexibility of U.S. labor markets. 20 More broadly, because immigrants often have different backgrounds, cultures, and experiences, they bring a diverse set of skills to the labor market, which also leads to better matches between firms and workers, and, hence, a more efficient labor supply, a theory supported by recent research. 21 For these reasons, immigrants probably boosted the U.S. labor supply compared with other countries.

I have had a lot to say about labor supply across countries, but labor demand has also been a factor in the rebalancing of labor markets. Central banks responded to the worldwide surge of inflation starting in 2021 with the most synchronized tightening of monetary policy since 1970. 22 Restrictive policy worked, and by 2022, labor demand began to soften, and vacancy rates decreased across advanced economies. We also saw hiring rates and quits rates trend down in the United States. The better balance between labor demand and supply has been seen in lower V/U ratios across many advanced economies. As I mentioned before, in the United States, this ratio went from the all-time high of 2 in early 2022 to 1.1 in January 2025, which is currently below the average observed in 2019, just before the pandemic. The rebalancing of the labor market is also evident in the moderation in wage growth since 2021, a big factor in the significant progress toward the FOMC's 2 percent inflation target. However, because different countries experienced different cumulative increases in their consumer prices in the recent episode of high inflation, wage growth has been "catching up" with inflation at different rates across countries, as workers aim to recover real income losses.

I should mention some other differences in the structure of labor markets that could explain differences in wage growth. A larger share of workers in Europe negotiates wages through labor unions. The euro area experienced a larger energy shock after Russia's attack on Ukraine, which led to union-driven wage negotiations aiming to recoup real income losses and more persistent wage growth in the euro area. Putting welfare and humanitarian aspects aside, which are quite important, the fact that many immigrants do not enter the labor force in the euro area when they first arrive because, among other reasons, they get support from government programs, also likely impedes the downward pressure from immigration on wage growth. Moreover, those immigrants who do enter the euro-area labor force may enter the pool of unionized workers and not bargain unilaterally for their wages, thus not putting downward pressure on wage growth. Additionally, higher productivity will allow wage growth to settle at higher levels without adding inflationary pressures to our economies, and with productivity growth in the U.S. running at a faster pace than in Europe, U.S. wage growth may end up settling at a higher level. Thus, I see the recent pace of U.S. wage growth as being consistent with our 2 percent inflation target once we account for catch-up effects and productivity growth.

As in some other parts of the world, I see the U.S. labor market as having substantially rebalanced, and conditions have stabilized at a level that I believe is close to the FOMC's goal of maximum employment. Still, I am closely monitoring any signs of changes in the labor market so that we can keep it in the good place that it is now while bringing down inflation to our target.

Thank you.
